Title: BioInsight: Multi-Agent Orchestration for Interactive Biomedical Knowledge Discovery

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.20997v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 00:25:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# BioInsight: Multi-Agent Orchestration for Interactive Biomedical Knowledge Discovery 

Jieyi Wang 1, Bingxuan Li 2,3 , Nanyi Jiang 3, Desong Meng 1, Zirui Fan 3,Yuxin Guo 4, Jiayu Liu 2, Kunlun Zhu 2, Eddie Yang 3, Xiusi Chen 2, Pan Lu 5, Bingxin Zhao 3*1Peking University, 2University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

> 3

University of Pennsylvania 4Purdue University 5Stanford University 

> joysw@stu.pku.edu.cn, bxzhao@wharton.upenn.edu

Abstract 

Biomedical researchers increasingly use AI-generated analyses and reports to interpret protein-level signals, but static outputs are of-ten insufficient for research decision-making, where users need to inspect evidence, assess uncertainty, compare mechanisms, and refine hypotheses. We present B IO INSIGHT , a multi-agent system that moves from static biomed-ical report generation to interactive evidence-centered interactive interface generation. Given a disease name, a protein association table, and optional cohort metadata, BioInsight organizes disease-specific evidence through typed inter-mediate artifacts, including ranked pathways, literature evidence packets, protein-level rea-soning notes, citation-grounded reports, dash-board schemas, and rendered interactive inter-faces. The system decomposes evidence re-trieval from mechanistic reasoning, normalizes citations through deterministic components, and converts the same structured evidence used in the report into an interactive interface. We evaluate BioInsight on standardized biomedi-cal QA, challenging protein-function reason-ing, and end-to-end biomedical evidence syn-thesis. Results show that BioInsight achieves best, and suggest that biomedical AI systems should move beyond text-only and static re-ports toward provenance-preserving, interac-tive evidence artifacts. 

1 Introduction 

Biomedical researchers increasingly rely on AI-generated analyses, rationales, and reports to sup-port research decision-making (Barabási et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024). In disease biology, such decisions often begin with protein-level signals: a cohort study or experimen-tal screen identifies disease-associated proteins, and researchers must determine which pathways, mechanisms, and follow-up hypotheses merit fur-ther investigation. This process cannot be reduced 

> *Corresponding author.

to simply inspecting a ranked list of proteins. In-stead, protein signals must be interpreted in the context of pathway annotations, protein–protein interaction networks, disease-specific literature, and drug–target evidence (Menche et al., 2015; Yıldırım et al., 2007). Recent search-augmented LLMs and deep re-search agents can retrieve evidence, browse litera-ture, and produce citation-grounded answers (Jin et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2025b; Shao et al., 2026). Biomedical agents such as Biomni further show that language models can coordinate tools, databases, and code execution for complex biomedical tasks (Huang et al., 2025). These sys-tems make AI-generated analysis more accessible, but their outputs usually end as text, a static report, or a structured table. That output format is a poor fit for biomedical research decision-making. Biomed-ical researchers need to interrogate how a conclu-sion was produced, which evidence supports it, and where competing interpretations remain plausi-ble. Interactive outputs can support this process by keeping evidence, uncertainty, and provenance vis-ible during exploration, rather than flattening them into a fixed narrative. Such interfaces also allow researchers to move between overview and detail, compare alternative mechanistic explanations, and form new follow-up questions without losing the link between claims, proteins, and source evidence. Researchers need to inspect evidence, compare alternative mechanisms, check uncertainty, trace claims back to proteins and papers, and refine hy-potheses as new questions arise (Gao et al., 2024; Gierend et al., 2024). This gap motivates a shift from static report gen-eration to evidence-centered interactive interface generation. Instead of asking an agent only to an-swer a question, write a report, or fill a table, we ask whether it can turn retrieved and synthesized evidence into an explorable decision-support arti-fact (Wong et al., 2025; Leviathan et al., 2026). The       

> arXiv:2606.20997v1 [cs.AI] 19 Jun 2026 Search Agent
> Retrieve & Rank
> desease-relevant
> evidence
> Knowledge Base
> PubMed, OpenTarget,
> UniProt, STRING(PPI), ...
> Text-based Deep Research BioInsight: Multi-Agent Harness
> Decompose by function for accuracy, transparency, and usability
> Reasoning Agent
> Evaluate mechan-
> isms, prioritize
> proteins & path-
> ways, generate
> hypotheses
> Summarization
> Agent
> Citation-
> grounded
> interpretations
> Visualization
> Agent
> Generate
> Interactive
> dashboards for
> exploration
> Citation-grounded Report
> with Structured Data & Evidence Schema
> Iterative refinement
> One model searching and reasoning end-to-end
> Interactive
> Dashboard
> - Evidence traceable;
> - Drug Exploration;
> - Rapid v isual-
> ization, e asy to
> explore and
> understand ;
> explorable decision-
> support artifacts
> Evidence Layer Synthesis Layer Interface Layer

Biomedical 

Research Questions     

> Multi-hop
> How do proteins, and drug
> targets connect?
> Prioritization
> Which proteins or pathways are
> most disease-relevant?
> Hierarchy
> How should broad pathways be organized
> into specific disease mechanisms?
> Grounding
> What evidence supports
> each mechanistic claim?
> Search / Retrieval
> Query Planning
> Text Sy nthesis
> Static Text Report
> - Hard to inspect intermediate
> evidence;
> -Hard to update;
> - Hard to read (for multi-hop
> links, ranking rationale, ...);

Figure 1: BioInsight converts disease-centered protein evidence into an interactive evidence interface. The system uses agent-produced artifacts for search, reasoning, report writing, and dashboard construction, so users can move from high-level hypotheses to the proteins, pathways, publications, and interaction evidence behind them. 

desired output should preserve the evidence chain: which proteins drive a pathway, which publications support a claim, which links are mechanistic or in-direct, where evidence is weak, and how the same evidence appears in both narrative and visual form. We study this problem in the setting of disease-centered protein interpretation (Agrawal et al., 2018; Koscielny et al., 2017). Given a disease name, a table of disease-associated proteins, and optional cohort metadata, the goal is to produce an interactive workspace for research interpreta-tion. This workspace contains ranked pathways, evidence packets, protein-level reasoning notes, citation-grounded explanations, and visual evi-dence views. As shown in Fig. 2, compared with DeepSearch-style text answers (Zhang et al., 2025; Yuan et al., 2026), DeepResearch-style reports (Tongyi DeepResearch Team, 2025), or WideSearch-style tables (Wong et al., 2025), our output is meant to support continued inspection and hypothesis refinement. To evaluate this setting, we construct BioInsight-1k , a benchmark for protein-function reasoning built from UniProt and STRING evidence. We further evaluate end-to-end disease-level interpre-tation across five diseases. We then propose 

BioInsight , a multi-agent system for biomedical evidence-centered interactive interface generation. BioInsight separates evidence acquisition from ev-idence interpretation: the Search Agent collects and ranks disease-specific evidence, while the Rea-soning Agent works over this fixed evidence set to prioritize proteins, compare pathways, identify mechanistic links, and mark uncertain claims. A Writing Agent produces a citation-grounded report, and a Visualization Agent converts the same struc-tured artifacts into an interactive dashboard. The dashboard is generated from typed evidence ob-jects instead of unconstrained interface code, which keeps the interactive interface aligned with the re-port and its supporting evidence. Our proposed model is designed around the hy-pothesis that biomedical AI systems become more useful when their intermediate evidence objects are not hidden inside a final narrative, but instead preserved, organized, and exposed through an in-terface that supports inspection and verification. We evaluate this hypothesis across three comple-mentary settings: standardized biomedical question answering, challenging protein-function analysis, and end-to-end assessment of generated reports and interactive dashboards. Across these evalu-ations, BioInsight achieves the best or tied-best performance on standardized biomedical QA, ob-tains the highest expert score on BioInsight-100, and receives stronger expert ratings for traceability, ranking quality, and dashboard usability in end-to-end disease interpretation. To summarize, our contributions are three-folds: • We formulate disease-centered protein inter-pretation as an evidence-centered interactive interface generation task, where the output is an explorable workspace linking pathways, proteins, publications, reasoning notes, and visual evidence views. • We introduce BioInsight, a multi-agent evi-dence orchestration system that converts pro-tein association tables into citation-grounded reports and provenance-preserving dash-boards through typed intermediate artifacts. Dimension DeepSearch DeepResearch WideSearch Bio Insight (Ours)   

> Core Task
> Find specific,
> hidden facts or
> entities.
> Explore a complex
> topic to generate a
> comprehensive
> report.
> Systematically
> find and organize
> large-scale
> information based
> on given criteria.
> Retrieve, connect, and
> synthesize disease-
> centered biomedical
> evidence for protein
> interpretation.
> Output
> Format
> A single or a few
> entities/facts.
> A research report or
> long-form text.
> A structured table
> of entities.
> Citation-grounded
> report + interactive
> generative interface.
> Evaluation Exact Match.
> Subjective
> evaluation, e.g.,
> logic, depth, insight.
> Quantitative
> metrics, e.g.,
> precision, recall,
> F1-score.
> Human evaluation;
> Quantitative metrics
> for biomedical
> reasoning
> Readability
> ↑
> Low to medium.
> Answers are
> concise, but
> often lack
> context;
> Medium. Long-form
> reports are readable,
> but dense and hard
> to trace.
> Medium to high.
> Straightforward
> for comparison
> but overwhelming
> at large scale.
> High; Evidence-
> grounded and
> traceable; interactive
> visual exploration.
> Core Model
> Challenge
> Deep reasoning,
> multi-step
> inference, and
> noise filtering.
> Information
> synthesis, logical
> organization, and
> coherent expression.
> Exhaustiveness
> and fidelity of
> information.
> Biomedical reasoning,
> evidence grounding,
> structured synthesis,
> and interactive
> interface.
> DeepResearch
> Deep Search
> WideSearch
> BioVoyager

Figure 2: Conceptual positioning of DeepSearch, Deep-Research, WideSearch, and BioInsight, contrasting them across key dimensions including core tasks, evalu-ation methods, and primary value propositions. 

• We construct BioInsight-1k, a benchmark for protein-function reasoning, and evaluate BioInsight across biomedical QA, challeng-ing protein analysis, and expert assessment of report quality, evidence traceability, and dashboard usability. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Search and Deep Research Agents 

The explosive growth of LLMs has enabled the de-velopment of language agents. Their ability to per-ceive and reason over complex information shows promise as intelligent assistants that auto- mate real-world tasks across different domains. (Yao et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a; Liu et al., 2026; Li et al., 2026b,a). Recent work extends this idea to multi-step web search and long-form research writing. Search-R1 and ASearcher train models to interleave reasoning with search (Jin et al., 2025; Gao et al., 2025), while WebThinker, WebExplorer, Tongyi DeepResearch, and DR-Tulu focus on well-attributed answers or reports over retrieved evidence (Li et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2025b; Tongyi DeepResearch Team, 2025; Shao et al., 2026). Evaluation work on RAG and self-reflective retrieval further shows the need to assess grounding and evidence use, not just final text qual-ity (Es et al., 2024; Asai et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Zhu et al., 2025; Yu et al., 2025). BioInsight builds on this direction but changes the output tar-get from a text answer or static report to an evi-dence workspace that keeps retrieval, reasoning, citations, and interface elements linked. 

2.2 Biomedical Agents for Evidence Synthesis 

Biomedical LLM agents connect language models with literature, databases, tools, and code execu-tion environments (Sokolova et al., 2025). Biomni demonstrates broad biomedical task automation through tool use and planning (Huang et al., 2025); biomedical RAG and search systems improve ac-cess to PubMed and domain knowledge bases be-fore generation (Bi et al., 2025; Liu et al., 2025a). These systems usually treat retrieved evidence as context for question answering or task com-pletion. BioInsight targets a narrower decision-support setting: disease-centered protein interpre-tation, where protein association signals must be connected to pathways, publications, PPI modules, drug–target context, and uncertainty. This setting is related to target-discovery and disease-network resources (Koscielny et al., 2017; Agrawal et al., 2018), but the output is organized as inspectable artifacts instead of a single biomedical answer. 

2.3 Interactive Scientific Interfaces 

Visual analytics and generative interface systems explore how scientific information can move from static text to interactive artifacts (Sosa et al., 2020). PaperVoyager converts papers into executable inter-active systems (Dai et al., 2026), and recent genera-tive interactive interface work shows that LLMs can produce task-specific interfaces (Leviathan et al., 2026; Google A2UI Team, 2026). Biomedical use cases add a stricter constraint: visual elements must remain tied to heterogeneous evidence such as proteins, pathways, publications, interactions, and drug context (Ehlers et al., 2025). BioInsight therefore treats interactive interface generation as a transformation of structured evidence artifacts, not as open-ended interface creation. 

3 Method 

We present BioInsight , a harness-centered multi-agent system for wide biomedical evidence synthesis in disease-centered protein interpreta-tion. BioInsight decomposes disease-centered pro-tein evidence into an interactive decision-support workspace. The report is one artifact in this pro-cess, not the endpoint. The system first builds struc-tured evidence objects from protein associations, pathway enrichment, literature retrieval, and inter-action data; it then uses those objects to generate both a citation-grounded narrative and a dashboard schema. The rendered dashboard exposes the same evidence chain used by the report, allowing users to inspect claims, proteins, citations, and uncertainty from multiple views. 

3.1 Task Formulation 

We define its task as evidence-centered interac-tive interface generation: given disease-associated protein signals, multiple agents iteratively re-trieve, rank, reason over, write about, and visu-alize biomedical evidence to produce explorable decision-support artifacts. The harness coordinates these agents through typed artifact contracts, so each refinement step can reuse, revise, or expose upstream evidence without losing provenance. An input instance is 

x = ( d, P, M, K ),

where d is a disease name, P is a disease-associated protein table, M is optional cohort metadata, and K denotes external biomedical knowledge re-sources. The protein table contains protein symbols and statistical association fields such as hazard ra-tios, confidence intervals, and P values. The system produces 

Y = ( T, E, N, R, S, H ),

where T is a ranked pathway table, E is a set of evidence packets, N contains pathway- and protein-level reasoning notes, R is a citation-grounded re-port, S is a dashboard schema, and H is the ren-dered interactive dashboard. Search and planning agents construct T and E; reasoning and writing agents refine them into N and R; the visualiza-tion agent converts the same evidence base into 

S and H. H is the primary user-facing artifact, while T , E, N , R, and S provide its provenance. Each downstream artifact keeps references to the upstream proteins, pathways, statistics, evidence packets, and citations from which it was derived. 

3.2 Multi-Agent Harness Design 3.2.1 Overview 

BioInsight has three layers. The evidence layer per-forms pathway planning and publication retrieval. The synthesis layer produces structured reasoning notes and a citation-grounded report. The interface layer converts the same evidence objects into an interactive dashboard. A central harness sched-ules these stages, validates required fields, and passes only typed artifacts between agents. Given a disease name, protein table, and cohort meta-data, the system sequentially plans pathway-level hypotheses, retrieves biomedical evidence, synthe-sizes structured mechanisms, formats citations, and renders the final report and interactive dashboard. All LLM agents use GPT-4o as the base model. This organization keeps generated interactive in-terface tied to evidence. The Visualization Agent does not invent new nodes or claims. It receives structured outputs from earlier stages and renders them as an evidence workspace. If a pathway, pro-tein, or publication is missing from the artifacts, it cannot appear as a supported item in the dashboard. 

3.2.2 Evidence Planning and Retrieval Pathway Planning The Planning Agent identi-fies candidate biological mechanisms from the in-put protein set. It maps disease-associated pro-teins to enriched biological terms using g:Profiler. Near-duplicate pathway names are removed with BioBERT embedding similarity after generic path-way phrases are stripped. The remaining pathways are ranked by combining enrichment strength with disease-specific literature support. For pathway t, let p(t) denote its enrichment 

P value and L(t) denote the literature relevance score returned by the Search Agent. We normalize these values across candidate pathways to obtain 

Pnorm (t) and Lnorm (t), where lower Pnorm (t) in-dicates stronger enrichment and higher Lnorm (t)

indicates stronger disease-specific literature sup-port. The pathway score is 

Spath (t) = 0 .4 · Pnorm (t) + 0 .6 · (1 − Lnorm (t)) .

Lower scores are prioritized. This favors path-ways that are both statistically supported by the input protein set and grounded in disease-relevant literature. 

Publication Retrieval and Scoring For each candidate pathway, the Search Agent builds disease-pathway queries from the disease name and pathway name. It retrieves publications from PubMed and Semantic Scholar, then normalizes them into evidence packets. Each publication is scored using lexical relevance, semantic relevance, citation impact, and journal weight. For query 

q = ( d, t ) and article a, the raw score is 

Sraw (q, a ) = 0 .45 K(q, a ) + 0 .35 E(q, a )+ 0 .20 C(a),

where K(q, a ) measures disease-pathway keyword matches, E(q, a ) is BioBERT semantic similarity between the query and title-abstract text, and C(a)

is a log-scaled citation-count score. The final score applies a bounded journal weight: 

Spub (q, a ) = clip ( Sraw (q, a ) · J(a), 0, 2.2) ,

where J(a) is derived from the publication venue. Publications with Spub ≥ 0.25 are retained as vali-dated evidence. Each retained item stores the query, metadata, relevance score, PMID when available, and the pathway for which it was retrieved. 

3.2.3 Evidence Synthesis 

For each selected pathway, the Reasoning Agent receives the disease name, pathway identifier, path-way description, intersecting proteins, original as-sociation statistics, validated publication packets, protein function records, and PPI records when available. It returns structured reasoning notes in-stead of final prose. Each note contains a pathway interpretation, disease relevance, key protein sum-maries, PPI-module explanations, uncertainty state-ments, and citation links. The full reasoning-note schema is provided in Appendix A. Protein–protein interactions are represented as graph evidence. For proteins intersecting a path-way, BioInsight builds an undirected weighted graph from retrieved PPI edges, identifies con-nected components, and ranks components by in-ternal edge weight and size. The top components are used for cluster-level reasoning; disconnected proteins are analyzed individually using protein function annotations. This separates isolated pro-tein evidence from coherent interaction modules within a disease-relevant pathway. 

3.2.4 Evidence-Centered Interactive Interface Generation 

The Writing Agent organizes reasoning notes into a scientific report. The report includes a disease intro-duction, cohort and protein summary, ranked path-way table, pathway-level analyses, protein-level ex-planations, PPI summaries and links, optional drug or target context, and citation identifiers. Then, the Visualization Agent converts the organized insights, original protein table, and cached evidence artifacts into a dashboard schema. Pathways, proteins, publi-cations, PPI edges, and optional drug-related edges are extracted according to predefined schemas. Op-tional language-model summarization is used only to shorten long display text; it does not create new evidence objects. The dashboard contains a pathway ranking panel, a graph linking pathways, proteins, publications, PPI edges, and optional drug-related evidence, and detail panels for selected nodes or edges. Users can inspect enriched proteins for a pathway, view original association statistics for a protein, open PMID-linked publication evidence, and filter the graph by edge type. The output is therefore an explorable decision-support artifact built from the same evidence that supports the generated report. 

4 Experiments and Results 

We evaluate BioInsight through three complemen-tary settings: standardized biomedical QA, chal-lenging protein-function analysis, and end-to-end biomedical evidence synthesis. We ask three re-search questions: • Can a harness-centered multi-agent system im-prove exact-answer accuracy in standardized biomedical question answering? • Can BioInsight search wide biomedical evi-dence and solve challenging protein analysis questions that require deep biomedical reason-ing and ranking? • Can BioInsight generate end-to-end biomedi-cal reports that are more comprehensive, fac-tually valid, traceable, in-depth and usable? 

4.1 Baselines and Setup 

We use task-specific baselines. For RQ1 and RQ2, we compare BioInsight with GPT-5.5, DR-Tulu-8B, Gemma-4-31B, and Qwen3.5-9B to cover general-purpose, biomedical/domain-aligned, and open-weight LLM systems. For RQ3, we broaden the comparison to eight systems: Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.5 + Search, Gemini Deep Research, Gemma-4-31B + Search, Qwen3.5-9B + Search, DR-Tulu-8B, BioInsight, and BioInsight without search decomposition. For all baselines, we use the same input dis-ease names, protein association tables, and task instructions as BioInsight. Search-enabled sys-tems are given the same evidence-seeking objec-tive and comparable retrieval budget when appli-cable, and all systems are evaluated on the same BioASQ batch, BioInsight-100 questions, and 5 specific disease-case splits. Additional model set-tings, prompts, retrieval budgets, and evaluation rubrics are provided in Appendix C. Figure 3: Results on BioASQ Phase B Exact Answer task, Batch 1. All five metrics are higher-is-better. BioInsight achieves the best performance across all five exact-answer metrics. 

4.2 Exact-Answer Accuracy in Standardized Biomedical QA 

We first test BioInsight on BioASQ Phase B, cov-ering yes/no, factoid, and list questions, provid-ing a controlled check of a necessary ability for evidence-centered interactive interface generation: before a system can build an explorable biomed-ical workspace, it must reliably identify concise biomedical answers, normalize entities, and select evidence-supported items from retrieved material. BioASQ therefore serves as a grounding test for the retrieval, ranking, and answer-control components that later feed the report and dashboard. Figure 3 shows that BioInsight is best or tied-best across all five metrics. The largest gains ap-pear on entity-ranking and multi-answer extraction, where BioInsight improves over the strongest base-line by 1.9 points in factoid MRR and 4.4 points in list F-measure. Interactive decision-support ar-tifacts depend on the same operation at a larger scale: selecting the right biomedical entities, keep-ing them ranked, and preserving their evidence links. The gains on factoid ranking and list extrac-tion suggest that BioInsight’s artifact-based work-flow helps maintain this evidence-to-entity map-ping before the information is expanded into re-ports and interactive interface views. 

4.3 Challenging Protein-Function Analysis 

BioInsight’s performance on BioASQ demon-strates its ability to produce concise biomedical answers from provided evidence documents. How-ever, disease-centered protein interpretation also requires broader reasoning with wide search (Wong et al., 2025). Therefore, we further evaluated BioIn-sight on open-ended protein-function questions that require searching, integrating functional annota-tions, protein-protein interactions, pathway context, disease mechanisms, and ranking explanations. We construct BioInsight-1k from UniProt and STRING evidence and use GPT-5.5 to generate candidate questions; biomedical experts then se-lect 100 challenging cross-evidence questions to form BioInsight-100, with careful manual review. Figure 4 reports 0–10 expert scores across five sys-tems. BioInsight obtains the highest mean score of 8.62. The score distributions show that BioInsight answers are concentrated in the high-score range, suggesting more stable protein-centered reasoning and evidence ranking. 

4.4 End-to-End Biomedical Evidence Interactive Interface Generation 

We evaluate whether systems can turn disease-associated protein lists into end-to-end biomedi-cal reports and evidence workspaces. This setting is closest to the target use case: researchers need more than correct local answers; they need a co-herent synthesis that selects mechanisms, grounds claims, ranks proteins and pathways, and supports follow-up inspection. Following prior guidance for evidence synthesis and generative scientific evalua-tion (Page et al., 2021; Clark et al., 2024; Flemyng et al., 2025), we design five dimensions for eval-uation. The full automatic and human evaluation protocol is provided in Appendix C. As shown in Appendix B.4, we evaluate five diseases cho-sen to cover different biomedical decision regimes, including Alzheimer’s disease (AD), depression (MDD), atrial fibrillation and flutter (AF), chronic kidney disease (CKD), and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The evaluation results of Atrial fibrillation and flutter are shown in Figure 5, and the results of other diseases are listed in Table 1. For automatic evaluation, we score all six sys-tems on four dimensions twice: coverage, biomed-ical validity, evidence grounding and traceability, and prioritization and research depth. GPT-5.5 Table 1: Automatic and human evaluation of end-to-end biomedical evidence synthesis reports (except AF).                                                                                                                                                                                              

> Disease Models Automatic Evaluation Human Evaluation Cov. Val. Trac. Rank. Cov. Val. Trac. Rank. Read. AD GPT5.5 + Web 4.0 4.0 3.0 3.5 4.00 4.75 4.50 4.25 4.50 Gemini Deep Search 4.0 3.0 3.0 3.5 4.50 3.50 4.00 4.00 4.50 DR-Tulu-8B 3.0 2.5 2.0 2.5 3.00 4.00 3.67 3.33 3.67 Qwen3.5-9B 3.0 2.5 2.0 2.5 -----BioInsight (w/o Search) 4.0 (3.5) 4.0 (3.0) 3.5 (3.0) 4.0 (3.0) 3.75 4.00 4.50 4.00 4.50 CKD GPT5.5 + Web 3.5 4.0 3.5 3.5 4.33 5.00 4.33 3.67 4.00 Gemini Deep Search 4.0 4.0 2.5 3.5 5.00 4.50 3.50 4.00 4.50 DR-Tulu-8B 3.0 2.5 1.5 2.5 2.33 3.00 2.00 2.33 2.33 Qwen3.5-9B 3.0 3.0 2.5 3.0 BioInsight (w/o Search) 3.5 (3.5) 4.0 (3.0) 3.5 (3.0) 3.5 (3.0) 4.67 4.00 3.67 4.00 4.50 MDD GPT5.5 + Web 3.5 4.0 3.5 4.0 4.33 4.67 4.33 3.67 4.33 Gemini Deep Search 4.0 3.0 2.5 3.5 4.50 4.50 3.50 4.50 4.50 DR-Tulu-8B 2.5 2.5 1.5 2.0 3.00 2.33 3.33 2.33 2.00 Qwen3.5-9B 3.0 3.0 2.5 3.0 -----BioInsight (w/o Search) 4.0 (3.5) 4.0 (3.0) 3.5 (2.5) 4.0 (3.0) 3.67 3.00 3.00 3.33 4.50 RA GPT5.5 + Web 4.0 4.0 3.0 3.5 4.67 4.67 4.33 3.67 4.67 Gemini Deep Search 3.5 3.0 2.5 3.0 4.50 4.50 3.50 3.50 4.50 DR-Tulu-8B 3.0 2.0 1.5 2.5 2.33 3.33 2.33 3.00 2.33 Qwen3.5-9B 3.0 2.5 2.0 2.5 ----BioInsight (w/o Search) 4.0 (3.5) 4.5 (3.0) 3.5 (3.0) 4.0 (3.0) 3.33 3.50 3.33 3.67 4.83

+ Search represent strong frontier search-enabled systems; Qwen3.5-9B + Search test open-weight models under the same search objective, which is at the same parameter quantity level to DR-Tulu-8B; Gemini Deep Research represents a commer-cial deep-research workflow; DR-Tulu-8B tests a biomedical/domain-oriented model; and the BioIn-sight ablation tests whether explicit search and rea-soning stages are necessary for the full system. To control the result not influenced by searching abil-ity, all "+ Search" means that the generation is based on the literature searched by BioInsight. For human evaluation, we select the four strongest or most representative systems from the automatic study: GPT-5.5 + Search, Gemini Deep Research, DR-Tulu-8B, and BioInsight. Experts assess five dimensions, with an addition of readability. Figure 5 1 shows that BioInsight is strongest overall, especially on evidence grounding, trace-ability, and prioritization. Biomedical validity is less separated across the strongest systems, which suggests that this dimension is strongly affected by the underlying base model’s biomedical knowl-edge and generation quality. By contrast, traceabil-ity and ranking quality depend more on workflow structure. The w/o Search ablation obtains consis-tently lower scores across coverage, validity, trace-ability, and ranking, indicating that explicit search is important for grounding the reasoning process and producing better protein prioritization.  

> 1An anonymized output result is available at http://3. 148.244.109:5000/

Furthermore, BioInsight receives the strongest expert ratings for traceable synthesis, ranking, and usability. Expert comments further indicate that BioInsight is the only system that consistently sur-faces disease-association evidence, which gives re-searchers concrete hints for disease–protein analy-sis rather than only a general biological summary. The interactive interface is also recognized as use-ful for checking pathways, proteins, and citations. At the same time, experts are willing to use clear and well-organized Markdown reports, suggesting that the value of the interactive interface comes from evidence traceability and navigation rather than visual presentation alone. Besides, as infor-mation passes through retrieval, reasoning, writing, and visualization stages, some coverage can be lost or compressed. In our results, this did not pre-vent BioInsight from producing useful reports, but it points to an important open question for future deep research: more retrieved information is not always better if it cannot be ranked, grounded, and presented in a form that researchers can inspect. Overall, the three evaluations show complemen-tary strengths. BioInsight improves exact biomedi-cal answering on BioASQ, achieves stronger cross-evidence protein-function reasoning on BioInsight-100, and produces more traceable and usable end-to-end biomedical evidence synthesis reports. These results support the central claim that harness-centered artifact contracts can improve biomedical evidence synthesis beyond single-step search or fluent long-form generation. Figure 4: Evaluation score distributions on the BioInsight-100 benchmark, a challenging subset of protein-function analysis questions from BioInsight-1k. Box plots with individual data points (a) and violin plots (b) show the distribution of 0–10 scores. 

5 Case Study 

We use Alzheimer’s disease (AD) to illustrate BioInsight as an evidence-centered interface, not a single-step report generator. AD is a suitable case because protein signals must be interpreted across synaptic dysfunction, lipid metabolism, glial activa-tion, axonal injury, and neurodegeneration instead of one dominant pathway. Given the disease name, cohort metadata, and 10 significant plasma proteins, BioInsight builds an artifact chain from protein statistics to pathways, publications, reasoning notes, and the dashboard in Figure 6. The Planning Agent identifies enriched candidate pathways, the Search Agent retrieves disease-specific literature, the Reasoning Agent integrates pathway, protein, PPI, and drug-related evidence, and the Visualization Agent exposes the resulting evidence structure for inspection. The resulting workspace keeps the interpretation grounded in the observed protein signals. APOE appears as a cross-pathway driver linking lipid re-

> Figure 5: Automatic and human evaluation of end-to-end biomedical evidence synthesis reports on Atrial fib-rillation and flutter. Cov., Val., Trac., Rank. and Read. respectively means coverage, biomedical validity, evi-dence traceability, ranking and research depth, and user usability. Higher scores indicate better performance.

ceptor biology, vesicle organization, synaptic pro-cesses, and axon-related hypotheses. GFAP and NEFL support glial and axonal-injury interpreta-tions, while SNAP25 and SYT1 form a presynaptic vesicle and chemical synapse module. Proteins with weaker pathway or literature support remain visible but are treated as exploratory. This case highlights the role of the interactive artifact. A pathway can be statistically enriched but weakly supported by AD-specific literature, while another may have moderate enrichment but clearer disease relevance. By combining enrichment evi-dence with publication support and making both visible, BioInsight turns a static disease report into an auditable path from proteins to pathways, cita-tions, mechanisms, and follow-up hypotheses. 

6 Conclusion 

We introduced B IO INSIGHT , a harness-centered multi-agent system for disease-centered protein in-terpretation. By enforcing artifact contracts be-tween retrieval, reasoning, writing, and dashboard construction, BioInsight exposes protein, pathway, publication, and citation links that are usually hidden in end-to-end biomedical agents. Across BioASQ, BioInsight-100, and report-level expert evaluation, the system improves exact answering, protein-function reasoning, and traceable report synthesis. These results suggest that more auditable biomedical evidence synthesis benefits from struc-tured, auditable intermediate artifacts rather than fluent generation alone. 

Limitations 

BioInsight is designed to support biomedical re-search interpretation and hypothesis generation, Figure 6: Case study on Alzheimer’s Disease. 

not clinical diagnosis, treatment selection, or other forms of clinical decision-making. A primary eth-ical risk is that users may overinterpret automat-ically generated pathway, protein, or drug–target explanations as validated biological mechanisms or therapeutic conclusions. Although BioInsight grounds its outputs in retrieved publications and ex-poses intermediate evidence through structured arti-facts and dashboards, the underlying evidence may still be incomplete or noisy. Retrieval can miss rele-vant studies, select papers that are topically related but mechanistically weak, or suffer from protein synonym ambiguity, incomplete database coverage, and noisy input protein associations. As a result, BioInsight may produce incomplete evidence sum-maries, uncertain mechanistic links, or hypotheses that require further validation. To mitigate these risks, BioInsight preserves ci-tation links, protein-level statistics, intermediate artifacts, uncertainty notes, and failure-handling be-haviors, allowing users to inspect how each claim is supported. However, these mechanisms are in-tended to support expert review rather than replace it. All outputs should be reviewed by domain ex-perts and validated through independent biomedi-cal analysis before being used to guide downstream experimental, translational, or clinical decisions. 

References 

Monica Agrawal, Marinka Zitnik, and Jure Leskovec. 2018. Large-scale analysis of disease pathways in the human interactome. In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing , volume 23, pages 111–122. Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2024. Self-rag: Learning to re-trieve, generate, and critique through self-reflection. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Albert-László Barabási, Natali Gulbahce, and Joseph Loscalzo. 2011. Network medicine: A network-based approach to human disease. Nature Reviews Genetics , 12(1):56–68. Manlian Bi, Zhijie Bao, and 1 others. 2025. Biora-gent: Natural language biomedical querying with retrieval-augmented multiagent systems. Briefings in Bioinformatics , 26(5):bbaf539. Justin Clark, Paul Glasziou, Chris Del Mar, Alexandra Bannach-Brown, Paul Stehlik, and Anna M. Scott. 2024. Generative artificial intelligence use in ev-idence synthesis: a systematic review. Research Synthesis Methods .Dasen Dai, Biao Wu, Meng Fang, and Wenhao Wang. 2026. Papervoyager: Building interactive web with visual language models. Preprint , arXiv:2603.22999. Henry Ehlers, Nicolas Brich, Michael Krone, Martin Nöllenburg, Jiacheng Yu, Hiroaki Natsukawa, Xiaoru Yuan, and Hsiang-Yun Wu. 2025. An introduction to and survey of biological network visualization. 

Computers & Graphics , 126:104115. Shahul Es, Jithin James, Luis Espinosa Anke, and Steven Schockaert. 2024. Ragas: Automated evalua-tion of retrieval augmented generation. In Proceed-ings of the 18th Conference of the European Chap-ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations , pages 150–158, St. Julians, Malta. Association for Computational Linguistics. Ella Flemyng and 1 others. 2025. Position statement on artificial intelligence use in evidence synthesis. 

Research Synthesis Methods .Jiaxuan Gao, Wei Fu, Minyang Xie, Shusheng Xu, Chuyi He, Zhiyu Mei, Banghua Zhu, and Yi Wu. 2025. Beyond ten turns: Unlocking long-horizon agentic search with large-scale asynchronous rl. 

Preprint , arXiv:2508.07976. Shanghua Gao, Ada Fang, Yepeng Huang, Valentina Giunchiglia, Ayush Noori, Jonathan Richard Schwarz, Yasha Ektefaie, Jovana Kondic, and Marinka Zitnik. 2024. Empowering biomedical dis-covery with ai agents. Cell , 187(22):6125–6151. Kerstin Gierend, Frank Krüger, Sascha Genehr, Fran-cisca Hartmann, Fabian Siegel, Dagmar Waltemath, Thomas Ganslandt, and Atinkut Alamirrew Zeleke. 2024. Provenance information for biomedical data and workflows: Scoping review. Journal of Medical Internet Research , 26:e51297. Google A2UI Team. 2026. A2ui v0.9: The new stan-dard for portable, framework-agnostic generative ui. Google Developers Blog. Published April 17, 2026. Kexin Huang, Serena Zhang, Hanchen Wang, Yuanhao Qu, Yingzhou Lu, Yusuf Roohani, Ryan Li, Lin Qiu, Junze Zhang, Yin Di, and 1 others. 2025. Biomni: A general-purpose biomedical ai agent. bioRxiv .Bowen Jin, Hansi Zeng, Zhenrui Yue, Jinsung Yoon, Sercan Arik, Dong Wang, Hamed Zamani, and Jiawei Han. 2025. Search-r1: Training llms to reason and leverage search engines with reinforcement learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2503.09516. Gautier Koscielny, Peter An, Denise Carvalho-Silva, Jennifer A. Cham, Luca Fumis, Rippa Gasparyan, Samiul Hasan, Nikiforos Karamanis, Michael Maguire, Eliseo Papa, Andrea Pierleoni, Miguel Pignatelli, Theo Platt, Francis Rowland, Priyanka Wankar, A. Patrícia Bento, Tony Burdett, Antonio Fabregat, Simon Forbes, and 37 others. 2017. Open targets: A platform for therapeutic target identi-fication and validation. Nucleic Acids Research ,45(D1):D985–D994. Yaniv Leviathan, Dani Valevski, Matan Kalman, Danny Lumen, Eyal Segalis, Eyal Molad, Shlomi Paster-nak, Vishnu Natchu, Valerie Nygaard, Srinivasan Venkatachary, James Manyika, and Yossi Matias. 2026. Generative ui: Llms are effective ui gener-ators. Preprint , arXiv:2604.09577. Bingxuan Li, Yiming Cui, Yicheng He, Yiwei Wang, Shu Zhang, Longyin Wen, and Yulei Niu. 2026a. Echofoley: Event-centric hierarchical control for video grounded creative sound generation. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 27229– 27238. Bingxuan Li, Jeonghwan Kim, Cheng Qian, Xiusi Chen, Eitan Anzenberg, Niran Kundapur, and Heng Ji. 2026b. Pearl: Self-evolving assistant for time man-agement with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.11957 .Bingxuan Li, Yiwei Wang, Jiuxiang Gu, Kai-Wei Chang, and Nanyun Peng. 2025a. METAL: A multi-agent framework for chart generation with test-time scaling. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 30054–30069, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Guanting Dong, Hongjin Qian, Yongkang Wu, Ji-Rong Wen, Yutao Zhu, and Zhicheng Dou. 2025b. Webthinker: Empowering large reasoning models with deep research capabil-ity. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Congying Liu, Xingyuan Wei, Peipei Liu, Yiqing Shen, Yanxu Mao, and Tiehan Cui. 2025a. Biomedsearch: A multi-source biomedical retrieval framework based on llms. Preprint , arXiv:2510.13926. Jiateng Liu, Zhenhailong Wang, Rushi Wang, Bingx-uan Li, Jeonghwan Kim, Aditi Tiwari, Pengfei Yu, Denghui Zhang, and Heng Ji. 2026. Osexpert: Computer-use agents learning professional skills via exploration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.07978 .Junteng Liu, Yunji Li, Chi Zhang, Jingyang Li, Aili Chen, Ke Ji, Weiyu Cheng, Zijia Wu, Chengyu Du, Qidi Xu, Jiayuan Song, Zhengmao Zhu, Wenhu Chen, Pengyu Zhao, and Junxian He. 2025b. Webexplorer: Explore and evolve for training long-horizon web agents. Preprint , arXiv:2509.06501. Jörg Menche, Amitabh Sharma, Maksim Kitsak, Su-san Dina Ghiassian, Marc Vidal, Joseph Loscalzo, and Albert-László Barabási. 2015. Disease net-works: Uncovering disease-disease relationships through the incomplete interactome. Science ,347(6224):1257601. Matthew J. Page, Joanne E. McKenzie, Patrick M. Bossuyt, Isabelle Boutron, Tammy C. Hoffmann, Cynthia D. Mulrow, Larissa Shamseer, Jennifer M. Tetzlaff, Elie A. Akl, Sue E. Brennan, Roger Chou, Julie Glanville, Jeremy M. Grimshaw, Asbjørn Hrób-jartsson, Manoj M. Lalu, Tianjing Li, Elizabeth W. Loder, Evan Mayo-Wilson, Steve McDonald, and 7 others. 2021. The prisma 2020 statement: an updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews. BMJ ,372:n71. Rulin Shao, Akari Asai, Shannon Zejiang Shen, Hamish Ivison, Varsha Kishore, Jingming Zhuo, Xinran Zhao, Molly Park, Samuel G. Finlayson, David Sontag, Tyler Murray, Sewon Min, Pradeep Dasigi, Luca Sol-daini, Faeze Brahman, Wen-tau Yih, Tongshuang Wu, Luke Zettlemoyer, Yoon Kim, and 2 others. 2026. Dr tulu: Reinforcement learning with evolving rubrics for deep research. In International Conference on Machine Learning .Ksenia Sokolova, Dmitri Kosenkov, Keerthana Nal-lamotu, Sanketh Vedula, Daniil Sokolov, Guillermo Sapiro, and Olga G. Troyanskaya. 2025. An evidence-grounded research assistant for functional genomics and drug target assessment. bioRxiv , page 2025.12.30.697073. Preprint. Daniel N. Sosa, Alexander Derry, Margaret Guo, Eric Wei, Connor Brinton, and Russ B. Altman. 2020. A literature-based knowledge graph embedding method for identifying drug repurposing opportunities in rare diseases. In Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2020 , volume 25, pages 463–474. Tongyi DeepResearch Team. 2025. Tongyi deepre-search technical report. Preprint , arXiv:2510.24701. Zifeng Wang, Lang Cao, Benjamin Danek, Qiao Jin, Zhiyong Lu, and Jimeng Sun. 2025. Accelerating clinical evidence synthesis with large language mod-els. npj Digital Medicine , 8(1):509. Ryan Wong, Jiawei Wang, Junjie Zhao, Li Chen, Yan Gao, Long Zhang, Xuan Zhou, Zuo Wang, Kai Xi-ang, Ge Zhang, Wenhao Huang, Yang Wang, and Ke Wang. 2025. Widesearch: Benchmarking agen-tic broad info-seeking. Preprint , arXiv:2508.07999. Benchmark for large-scale agentic information col-lection. Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Beibin Li, Erkang Zhu, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, Shaokun Zhang, Jiale Liu, Ahmed Hassan Awadal-lah, Ryen W. White, Doug Burger, and Chi Wang. 2024. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. 2024. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. 

Preprint , arXiv:2401.15884. Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Haofei Yu, Keyang Xuan, Fenghai Li, Kunlun Zhu, Zi-jie Lei, Jiaxun Zhang, Ziheng Qi, Kyle Richardson, and Jiaxuan You. 2025. Tinyscientist: An interactive, extensible, and controllable framework for building research agents. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations , pages 558–590. Yi Yuan, Xuhong Wang, and Shanzhe Lei. 2026. To-wards trustworthy report generation: A deep research agent with progressive confidence estimation and cal-ibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.05952 .Muhammed A. Yıldırım, Kwang-Il Goh, Michael E. Cusick, Albert-László Barabási, and Marc Vidal. 2007. Drug-target network. Nature Biotechnology ,25(10):1119–1126. Gongbo Zhang, Qiao Jin, Denis Jered McInerney, Yong Chen, Fei Wang, Curtis L. Cole, Qian Yang, Yanshan Wang, Bradley A. Malin, Mor Peleg, Byron C. Wal-lace, Zhiyong Lu, Chunhua Weng, and Yifan Peng. 2024. Leveraging generative ai for clinical evidence synthesis needs to ensure trustworthiness. Journal of Biomedical Informatics , 153:104640. Wenlin Zhang, Xiaopeng Li, Yingyi Zhang, Pengyue Jia, Yichao Wang, Huifeng Guo, Yong Liu, and Xiangyu Zhao. 2025. Deep research: A survey of autonomous research agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.12752 .Kunlun Zhu, Jiaxun Zhang, Ziheng Qi, Nuoxing Shang, Zijia Liu, Peixuan Han, Yue Su, Haofei Yu, and Jiax-uan You. 2025. SafeScientist: Enhancing AI scientist safety for risk-aware scientific discovery. In Proceed-ings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2289–2317, Suzhou, China. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. 

A Implementation and Artifact Details 

This appendix expands the implementation details behind the BioInsight harness. It is organized around the same artifact chain used in the method section: external resources, typed intermediate arti-facts, implementation parameters, and failure han-dling. 

A.1 External Biomedical Knowledge Resources 

BioInsight consumes external biomedical knowl-edge through resource-specific modules. Each re-source has a defined role, which prevents heteroge-neous evidence from being merged into an opaque retrieval result. 

A.2 Intermediate Artifacts and Reasoning Notes 

BioInsight stores pathway rankings, evidence pack-ets, reasoning notes, citation-linked drafts, net-work views, dashboard schemas, and rendered dashboards as separate artifacts. These artifacts make the system inspectable at several points: re-searchers can examine enriched pathways before reading the final narrative, trace report claims back to proteins and publications, and check whether the dashboard represents the same evidence used in the report. The reasoning-note schema used by the Reason-ing Agent is shown below. Each note contains pathway-level interpretation, disease relevance, key proteins, PPI module explanations, uncertainty, and citations. 

> {"pathway_id": "REAC:R-HSA-166658", "pathway_name": "Complement cascade", "disease_explanation": "...", "key_proteins": [ {"symbol": "C3", "function_note": "...", "association": {"hr_95ci": "...", "p_value ": "..."}, "citations": ["12345678"] }], "ppi_clusters": [ {"proteins": ["C3", "CFH", "C4A"], "cluster_explanation": "...", "citations": ["12345678"] }], "uncertainty": "...", "citations": ["12345678"] }

Table 2: External biomedical knowledge resources and their roles in the harness.            

> Resource Role in harness Used by
> g:Profiler Pathway enrichment over the input protein set Planning Agent PubMed Disease-pathway evidence retrieval and reference normalization Planning Agent, Reasoning Agent, Citation Formatter Semantic Scholar Literature ranking, citation-count support, and optional snippet-level evidence retrieval Planning Agent, Query Agent STRING Protein-protein interaction networks, figures, and external links Reasoning Agent, Visualization Agent UniProt-derived knowledge base Protein function descriptions Query Agent, Reasoning Agent Open Targets Target descriptions, drug context, bibliography, and associated diseases Query Agent, Visualization Agent DGIdb Pharmacogenetic drug-protein edges Visualization Agent

Figure 7: Typed artifact flow in BioInsight. Evidence retrieval, reasoning, writing, and visualization exchange structured objects rather than only free-form text. 

This schema gives the Reasoning Agent a nar-row and inspectable output channel. It must state what the pathway does, why it may matter for the disease, which input proteins drive the interpreta-tion, which interaction modules support the mecha-nism, and where evidence is weak or indirect. If no relevant publications are available, citation fields remain empty and the explanation is marked as exploratory. 

A.3 Implementation Parameters 

The harness exposes model choices as configura-tion parameters for the Planning, Search, Reason-ing, Writing, and Visualization Agents. Prompt templates are fixed across diseases; disease speci-ficity enters through the disease name, protein ta-ble, cohort metadata, pathway terms, and retrieved evidence packets. Table 3 summarizes the key non-prompt parameters used in the current configura-tion. Artifacts are stored under a disease-specific re-sult directory. The cache directory stores ranked pathway tables, selected top pathways, pathway overview drafts, iterative report drafts, citation-formatted reports, dashboard schemas, and ren-dered dashboard pages. External fetches are cached as JSON files so repeated runs can reuse STRING and DGIdb responses subject to each resource’s licensing terms. 

A.4 Quality Control and Failure Handling 

The harness is designed to expose evidence insuffi-ciency rather than hide it behind fluent text. Table 4 summarizes common failure modes and the corre-sponding graceful degradation behavior. If pathway enrichment returns no significant pathways, the system should report that the input protein set does not support a pathway-level inter-pretation rather than hallucinating mechanisms. If a pathway is statistically enriched but has little or no PubMed support, it can remain in the ranked table, but its narrative interpretation should be marked as literature-weak or exploratory. If UniProt-derived function annotations are missing for a protein, the protein-level explanation is omitted or marked un-available. If no protein-protein interaction edges are found, the system avoids cluster-level interpre-tation and instead treats proteins individually. External translational resources are also handled conservatively. If Open Targets or DGIdb returns no records for a protein, the system does not infer therapeutic relevance from absence of evidence. If Table 3: Key implementation parameters used in the current BioInsight harness. 

Component Parameter Value 

Pathway enrichment Organism hsapiens 

Pathway enrichment Significance threshold user_threshold = 0.05 

Pathway enrichment Correction method significance_threshold_method = "fdr" 

Pathway enrichment IEA annotations no_iea = True 

Pathway enrichment Ordered query ordered = False 

Pathway enrichment Highlighted terms highlight = True 

Pathway filtering Term size range 10 < term_size < 500 

Duplicate removal BioBERT cosine threshold 0.98 

Pathway selection Per-source retained pathways k = 2 

Report generation Maximum analyzed pathways 12 PubMed retrieval Maximum records per query 50 records with abstracts Semantic Scholar retrieval Maximum records per query 30 records Publication validation Score threshold Spub ≥ 0.25 

Publication storage Validated publications per pathway Top 20 Reasoning clusters Retained PPI components Top 2 connected components STRING dashboard retrieval Confidence threshold 0.4 STRING dashboard retrieval Maximum fetched proteins Top 80 proteins by literature and pathway evidence STRING dashboard retrieval Maximum stored edges 60 edges per query DGIdb retrieval Queried genes Top 8 ranked genes LLM generation Temperature 0.7 LLM retry Default retry setting 5 retries 

Table 4: Failure modes and graceful degradation behavior. 

Failure mode System behavior 

No significant enriched pathways Report evidence insufficiency instead of generating unsupported pathway mechanisms. Enriched pathway with weak literature support Retain the pathway in the ranked table when appropriate, but mark the interpretation as literature-weak or exploratory. Missing protein function annotation Omit the protein-level explanation or mark function evidence unavailable. No protein-protein interaction edges Skip cluster-level interpretation and analyze proteins individually. STRING link unavailable Retain the generated network image when available or omit the link if no network can be produced. Open Targets or DGIdb returns no records Do not infer therapeutic relevance from absence of records. PubMed metadata lookup fails Retain the PubMed link and surface missing metadata rather than dropping the citation. Malformed Reasoning Agent JSON Preserve the raw response for inspection, retry, or exclusion from final report assembly. Writing revision damages tables, links, or image syntax Use stored pre-revision and post-revision drafts for inspection and correction. External API unavailable Fall back to cached responses or narrower retrieval behavior when possible. STRING fails to return an interactive link, the re-port can still retain the generated network image, or omit the STRING link if no network is available. If a PubMed metadata lookup fails during citation for-matting, the PubMed link is retained and missing metadata is surfaced rather than silently dropping the citation. Language-model failures are handled at artifact boundaries. If the Reasoning Agent returns mal-formed JSON, the raw response is preserved as an inspectable artifact and can be retried or ex-cluded from final report assembly. If a coherence revision damages tables, links, or image syntax, downstream parsing and manual inspection can identify the failure because the pre-revision and post-revision drafts are both stored. 

B Experimental Setup Details 

This appendix provides reproducibility details for the three experimental settings described in Experi-ment Section and the surrounding experiments. 

B.1 Baseline and Input Matching 

All systems receive the same disease names, pro-tein association tables, and task instructions within each evaluation setting. Search-enabled baselines are given the same evidence-seeking objective and a comparable retrieval budget when applica-ble. BioInsight uses fixed agent prompts, pathway-ranking weights, retrieval parameters, citation-formatting rules, and dashboard-generation rules across all disease cases. Automatic metrics are computed from raw model outputs without manual correction. For RQ1 and RQ2, we compare BioInsight with GPT-5.5, DR-Tulu-8B, Gemma-4-31B, and Qwen3.5-9B. For RQ3, we evaluate Claude Son-net 4.6, GPT-5.5 + Search, Gemini Deep Research, Gemma-4-31B + Search, Qwen3.5-9B + Search, DR-Tulu-8B, BioInsight, and BioInsight without search decomposition. The ablated BioInsight vari-ant keeps the report-generation stage but removes the full explicit search and reasoning decompo-sition, allowing us to test the contribution of the harnessed evidence workflow. 

B.2 BioASQ Phase B 

BioASQ Phase B is used as a standardized exact-answer test for yes/no, factoid, and list questions. We evaluate Batch 1 and report yes/no accuracy, yes/no macro F1, factoid strict accuracy, factoid mean reciprocal rank, and list F-measure. This setting checks whether each system can select con-cise biomedical entities and evidence-supported answers before those entities are expanded into longer reports and dashboards. 

B.3 BioInsight-100 

BioInsight-100 is constructed from UniProt-derived function records and STRING interac-tion evidence. GPT-5.5 is used to generate can-didate protein-function questions that require cross-evidence reasoning, and biomedical experts select 100 challenging questions to form BioInsight-100. Each answer is scored on a 0–10 scale according to biomedical correctness, evidence use, protein-function specificity, pathway or interaction reason-ing, and clarity. An example from BioInsight-100 is shown be-low. The question requires the model to integrate protein-function annotations with interaction evi-dence and to recognize when the interaction context is weak or absent. 

> {"type": "function_ppi_integration", "question": "How do known interactions inform CEND1’s role in neuronal differentiation ?", "answer": "Integration is limited because no high-confidence STRING associations are available; UniProt notes homodimerization, aligning with a membrane role in promoting neuronal differentiation.", "evidence": [ {"source": "STRING", "confidence": "high", "field": "No high-confidence associations for Q8N111 in provided STRING context" }, {"source": "UniProt", "confidence": "high", "field": "FUNCTION; SUBUNIT ( homodimerization)" }]}

B.4 Disease Cases for Report Evaluation 

Table 5 summarizes the five disease cases used in end-to-end report and dashboard evaluation. The set covers neurodegenerative, psychiatric, cardio-vascular, renal/metabolic, and autoimmune/inflam-matory disease contexts. Table 5: Disease categories and evaluation rationale for end-to-end report and dashboard evaluation.                      

> Disease Type Key mechanistic features Evaluation value for BioInsight
> AD / Alzheimer’s disease Neurodegenerative dis-ease Protein aggregation, neuroinflamma-tion, synaptic degeneration, aging Tests integration of complex neurological mechanisms and long-term disease pro-gression evidence. Depression Psychiatric disorder Neurotransmitters, inflammation, endocrine regulation, gene– environment interactions Tests interpretation under heterogeneous mechanisms and uncertain disease biol-ogy. Atrial fibrillation and flut-ter Cardiac rhythm disorder Electrophysiological remodeling, cardiac structural remodeling, inflammation, coagulation risk Tests integration of clinical risk, biomarker, and proteomic evidence. Chronic kidney disease Chronic metabolic/renal disease Inflammation, fibrosis, oxidative stress, tubular injury Tests interpretation of chronic progres-sion, organ damage, and multi-pathway protein evidence. Rheumatoid arthritis Autoimmune/inflammatory disease Immune-cell activation, cytokines, synovial inflammation, tissue de-struction Tests interpretation of immune pathways and target-relevant protein evidence.

C Human Evaluation Protocol 

This appendix describes the human evaluation protocol used for report-level expert assessment. The goal of the evaluation is to assess whether BioInsight produces biomedical synthesis outputs that are complete, scientifically valid, evidence-integrative, well-prioritized, and usable for biomed-ical researchers. 

Evaluation setup. We evaluate system outputs on the five disease–protein interpretation cases in Table 5. For each disease case, evaluators are shown anonymized outputs from four systems: GPT-5.5 + Search, Gemini Deep Research, DR-Tulu-8B, and BioInsight. Each output consists of the generated biomedical interpretation report and, when available, the associated dashboard or evi-dence views. System names are hidden from eval-uators, and outputs are presented in randomized order to reduce ordering and model-identity bias. Evaluators assign a score from 1 to 5 for each eval-uation dimension and provide a brief justification for each score. We invited four domain experts for human evaluation. 

Evaluation dimensions. Following our report-level expert evaluation guideline, each output is rated along five dimensions: comprehensiveness, biomedical validity, evidence grounding and trace-ability, prioritization and research depth, and read-ability/dashboard usability. 

Comprehensiveness measures whether the sys-tem provides a complete end-to-end interpretation of the input protein list. This includes pathway enrichment, key proteins, molecular functions, dis-ease relevance, molecular mechanisms, PPI or net-work context, therapeutic associations when rel-evant, citations, dashboard evidence views, and cross-links among proteins, pathways, mechanisms, and translational findings. Reports are penalized when they cover only isolated proteins or pathways, omit important disease-protein interpretation mod-ules, or include modules only as shallow labels. 

Biomedical validity measures whether the bi-ological statements, disease interpretations, path-way explanations, protein annotations, mechanism chains, drug associations, and network interpreta-tions are factually correct, scientifically plausible, and appropriately qualified. Evaluators penalize hallucinated mechanisms, incorrect protein func-tions, generic disease associations, unsupported causal language, overextended clinical inference, fabricated or loosely related citations, and context errors such as tissue, stage, species, or biomarker-versus-causality mismatch. Rare or non-obvious pathways are not penalized merely for being un-common; they receive positive credit when they are biologically plausible, disease-relevant, and sup-ported by evidence. 

Evidence grounding and traceability measures whether conclusions are explicitly grounded in vis-ible evidence from the report, dashboard, and in-termediate artifacts. Evaluators check whether the output preserves an auditable chain from raw or intermediate evidence to interpretation, such as pro-tein statistics, mapped genes, enriched pathways, pathway rankings, PPI edges, literature records, database identifiers, drug records, and citation-linked claims. Strong outputs keep evidence close to the relevant claim, expose evidence fields such as p-values, enrichment scores, hit counts, confi-dence scores, literature counts, PubMed references, or drug–target records, and disclose weak, miss-ing, indirect, or uncertain evidence. Outputs are penalized when plausible claims are untraceable, citations are only loosely connected to claims, ev-idence provenance is mixed or unclear, or mecha-nistic conclusions exceed the strength of the cited evidence. 

Prioritization and research depth measures whether the system identifies which proteins, path-ways, mechanisms, PPI modules, biomarkers, drug links, or translational findings deserve deeper anal-ysis using evidence-weighted biomedical reason-ing. Evaluators consider whether rankings are sup-ported by visible quantitative and qualitative ev-idence, including enrichment statistics, pathway scores, mapped genes, protein hit counts, literature support, hazard ratios, PPI confidence, database ev-idence, druggability, and disease specificity. Strong outputs distinguish core data-supported findings from supporting proteins, peripheral associations, uncertain hits, indirect evidence, and speculative hypotheses. Outputs are penalized for arbitrary ordering, significance-only ranking without biolog-ical interpretation, literature-only ranking without enrichment context, shallow lists, generic pathway discussion, or over-prioritized translational claims without traceable support. 

Readability and dashboard usability measures whether the report and dashboard are understand-able, well-structured, visually clear, and useful for biomedical evidence exploration. For reports, eval-uators consider disease-story coherence, logical flow, terminology control, citation placement, and clarity of uncertainty. For dashboards, evaluators consider whether users can move from overview to detail, trace visual elements to evidence sources, drill down from pathways to proteins and citations, compare mechanisms or evidence strength, and in-teract with the interface without excessive cognitive load. 

Rating scale. All dimensions are scored on a five-point Likert scale. Although each dimension has dimension-specific criteria, the general interpreta-tion of the scale is as follows: 

Dimension-specific scoring guidelines. For cov-erage, a score of 1 indicates that the system only lists proteins or pathways with little interpretation, while a score of 5 indicates comprehensive cover-age of pathway enrichment, protein function, dis-ease relevance, mechanisms, PPI or interaction clusters, therapeutic associations, citations, and dashboard evidence exploration. For biomedical validity, a score of 1 indicates severe biomedical errors or hallucinated mechanisms, while a score of 5 indicates highly accurate, disease-specific, mech-       

> Score General interpretation
> 1Very poor. The output is incomplete, misleading, unsupported, or difficult to use. 2Weak. Some relevant information is present, but im-portant components are missing, shallow, inaccurate, or poorly connected. 3Moderate. The output covers major components and is mostly understandable, but evidence integration, validity, ranking transparency, or usability remains limited. 4Strong. The output is largely complete, disease-relevant, evidence-supported, and useful, with only minor issues. 5Excellent. The output is comprehensive, scientifi-cally reliable, deeply synthesized, well-prioritized, and easy to inspect through the report and dashboard.

Table 6: General five-point rating scale used in expert evaluation. Dimension-specific scoring instructions are provided to evaluators. 

anistically rigorous, and uncertainty-aware inter-pretation. For evidence synthesis depth, a score of 1 indicates no meaningful synthesis beyond lists of facts, while a score of 5 indicates a disease-specific, evidence-weighted, uncertainty-aware mechanis-tic model with clear therapeutic implications. For ranking quality, a score of 1 indicates arbitrary or misleading rankings, while a score of 5 indicates highly interpretable, evidence-weighted, disease-specific, uncertainty-aware, and actionable priori-tization. For readability and dashboard usability, a score of 1 indicates that the report is difficult to follow or the dashboard is confusing, while a score of 5 indicates a coherent disease story and intuitive, accurate, source-traceable evidence exploration. 

Qualitative analysis and Bias control. In ad-dition to numerical scores, we analyze evaluator justifications to identify recurring strengths and failure modes. We group comments into categories such as incomplete evidence coverage, generic dis-ease interpretation, unsupported causal language, weak protein-to-pathway linkage, shallow ranking explanation, citation misalignment, dashboard in-consistency, and poor evidence traceability. These qualitative findings are used to interpret the quanti-tative results above. The evaluation is blinded with respect to system identity, but it is still limited by the number of dis-ease cases and expert evaluators. Biomedical inter-pretation is also inherently judgment-dependent: experts may differ in how they weigh disease specificity, mechanistic plausibility, and evidence strength. To reduce bias, all systems are evaluated on the same disease cases, using the same scoring rubric, randomized output order, and identical eval-uation forms. Nevertheless, the human evaluation should be interpreted as expert assessment of re-search utility and evidence quality, rather than as a definitive biomedical validation of every generated claim. 

D The Use of Large Language Models (LLMs) 

In order to reduce typos during the writing process and to optimize complex sentence structures so that the article becomes simpler and easier to read, we use mainstream large language models to refine certain paragraphs. For example, we use prompts such as “Help me correct the typos and grammati-cal errors in the above text, and streamline the logic to make it clear and easy to understand.”