Title: 2606.24510v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.24510v1

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:58:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
1

# A specialized reasoning large language model for accelerating rare disease 

# diagnosis: a randomized AI physician -assistance tria l

Haichao Chen MD 1,2* , Songchi Zhou PhD 3* , Zhengyun Zhao PhD 3* , Shikai Hu MD 4, Xianghong Jin MD 5,

Hongwei Ji 1, Li H e6, Shuli Li 6, Yiming Qin PhD 1, Xin Tan PhD 7, Runfeng Shi MD 8, Yih Chung Tham 

PhD 9,10 ,11 , Jiaye Zhu 12 , Ye Li MD 8, Ye Jin PhD 5, Long hao Cao 13 , Dawei Li 13 , Honghan Wu 14 , Hongqiu Gu 15 ,

Guanqiao Li 16 , Tudor Groza PhD 17, 18, Chunying Li MD 6, Dian Zeng 1, Weihong Yu 2, Gareth Baynam PhD 19 ,

Saumya Shekhar Jamuar Ph D17,20 , Min Shen MD 5, Shuyang Zhang MD 5** , Bin Sheng PhD 21,22** , Sheng Yu 

PhD 3** , Tien Yin Wong PhD 1,10** 

> 1

Tsinghua Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. 

> 2

Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 

Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 

> 3

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. 

> 4

Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 

Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 

> 5

Department of Rare Diseases, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & 

Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. 

> 6

Department of Dermatology, Xijing Hospital, Air Force Medical University, Xi’an, Shan xi, China. 

> 7

School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University (ECNU), Shanghai, China .

> 8

Department of Neurosurgery, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. 

> 9

Department of Ophthalmology, National University of Singapore, Singapore. 

> 10

Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore. 

> 11

Ophthalmology and Visual Science Academic Clinical Program, Duke -NUS Medical School, Singapore. 

> 12

Department of Pediatrics, The First Hospital of Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. 

> 13

College of Future Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China .

> 14

School of Health and Wellbeing, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK .2

> 15

China National Clinical Research Center for Neurological Diseases, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical 

University, Beijing, China .

> 16

Vanke School of Public Health, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China .

> 17

Genetics service, KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Singapore, Singapore .

> 18

Bioinformatics Institute (BII), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore, Singapore .

> 19

Rare Care Centre, Perth Children’s Hospital, Perth, WA, Australia .

> 20

SingHealth Duke -NUS Institute of Precision Medicine, Singapore, Singapore .

> 21

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, School of Electronic, Information, and Electrical Engineering, 

Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 

> 22

MOE Key Laboratory of AI, School of Electronic, Information, and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong 

University, Shanghai, China. 

*Joint First Authors ** Co -Corresponding Authors 3

Abstract 

Rare diseases affect millions of individuals worldwide, yet timely diagnosis remains a major 

public health challenge due to scarcity of specialized clinical expertise. While large language 

models (LLMs) show promise to support rare disease diagnosis, current models are constrained 

by insufficient clinical deployability, limited clinically grounded evidence , and scarcity of 

training data. Here we present RaDaR (Rare Disease navigatoR), an open -source, compact 

reasoning LLM (32B parameters) for rare disease diagnosi s. RaDaR was trained with 49,170 

publicly available free -text cases and 104,666 synthetic cases with reasoning -enhanced training. 

RaDaR showed the strongest performance among evaluated open -source models, including the 

671B DeepSeek -R1, across public benchm arks and four external validation cente rs. In a 

retrospective cohort, RaDaR prioritized the final diagnosis before documented clinical suspicion 

in 61.06% of cases, corresponding to a potential lead time of 1.87 months and 50.18% of the 

within -centre interval. In a randomized physician -assistance trial, RaDaR assistance improved 

physicians’ rare -disease diagnostic accuracy by 21.44 percentage points compared with internet 

search alone (P < 0.0001). Synthetic -data ablations suggested that phenotype -anc hored narratives 

provide useful training signal for long -tail rare diseases, with a monotonic scaling trend within 

the tested data range. Together, RaDaR and its development and validation framework provide a 

deployable rare -disease reasoning model and a reproducible development framework for 

diagnostic AI under data scarcity. 4

Introduction 

Rare diseases constitute a critical global health challenge. Though individually rare, collectively, 

rare diseases affect 400 million patients, constituting nearly 6% of the global population 1-3.

Diagnosis is the central challenge in rare disease care. On average, patients wait 6.2 years to 

receive a confirmed diagnosis. Nearly half have more than five clinical visits and see six to eight 

different clinicians on average, a journey often described as a “diagnostic odyssey” 4-10 . The 

diagnostic odyssey reflects not only the cognitive challenge of recognizing thousands of 

heterogeneous conditions, but also the reasoning burden in fragmented and incomplete clinical 

evidence in the context of highly dispersed rare -disease expertise 11,12 .

AI -assisted diagnosis has emerged as a promising way to help bridge this knowledge gap by 

suggesting candidate conditions (usually termed differential diagnoses) beyond the typical 

physician’s regular training and experience. Prevailing methods such as PhenoBrain 13 and 

Exomiser 14 rely on structured representations like Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO), which is 

usually constrained by the low -granularity of patient presentations and heavy reliance on 

physicians for accurate phenotype extraction. The recent emergence of Large Language Models 

(LLMs) offers a transformative opportunity to overcome these barriers as an alternative approach 

to diagnostic support 15 -17 . LLMs can directly interpret unstructured clinical narratives, leveraging 

their extensive knowledge and reasoning capabilities to navigate complex presentations of rare 

diseases. Recent studies have also demonstrated the potential of proprietary LLMs to f acilitate rare 

disease diagnosis in retrospective cases 18 -20 .

However, translating theoretical efficacy of current LLM s into clinical practice faces substantial 

barriers. The first is an evaluation gap. Most existing studies assess models’ performance on 

retrospective and static cases, but such evaluation s provide limited insight into real -world clinical 

impact, including when a diagnosis can be suggested, how many patients may benefit from earlier 

prioritization, or whether physicians would actually change their diagnosis when assisted by the 

model 18,19,21 . The second is a data gap. Rare diseases are characterized by sparse real -world 

observations and extreme long -tail distributions, limiting both model training and evaluation. The 

third is a deployment gap. Current high -performing language models or agentic models are either 

closed -source (e.g., the GPT -o series), precluding their use under strict patient -data privacy 

regulations, or possess prohibitive parameter counts and require high computational resources (e.g., 5

671 B parameters for DeepSeek -R1 22 ), limiting local deployment in resource -constrained hospital 

environments 23,24 . These gaps in evaluation, data scarcity, and deployment continue to constrain 

the responsible clinical adoption of LLM -based diagnostic systems. 

To bridge these gaps, we introduced RaDaR (Rare Disease navigatoR ), an open -source and 32B -

parameter compact LLM tailored for rare disease diagnostics. We evaluated RaDaR across static 

free -text benchmarks, phenotype -input benchmarks, and multicenter external EHR datasets. To 

move beyond conventional single -case evaluation, we further tested RaDaR in cumulative multi -

visit diagnostic trajectories, estimating whether the model could prioritize the final diagnosis 

before documented clinical suspicion. W e then conducted a randomized physician -assistance trial, 

comparing conventional internet search with internet search plus RaDaR (Fig. 1). Finally, we 

evaluated the utility and scalability of the synthetic data construction pipeline. Together, these 

analyses position RaDaR not only as a deployable rare -disease reasoning model, but also as a 

claim -proportionate evaluation framework and scalable training paradigm for medical LLMs 

under data scarcity. 

Results 

An overview of the model development and evaluation 

In this study, we developed and released RaDaR, an open -source LLM specialized in rare disease 

diagnostics, initialized from the DeepSeek -R1 -Distill -Qwen -32B backbone. The training corpus 

integrated real -world case reports from the RareArena dataset 25 (derived from PMC case reports) 

with synthetic cases generated by powerful LLMs via a phenotype -anchored pipeline. The model 

underwent a two -stage reasoning enhancement process: (1) Supervised Fine -Tuning (SFT) 

utilizing 15 4k cases (49,170 real and 104,666 synthetic cases) with reasoning trajectories distilled 

from DeepSeek -R1; and (2) Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) using 14k preference pairs on 

4,750 selected cases derived from SFT model rollouts (Fig. 1). 

We evaluated the model across three distinct benchmarks to assess in -distribution retention, real -

world generalization, and adaptability across input format. First, we constructed a RareArena hold -

out test set by sampling up to three cases per disease (enc ompassing all available cases for diseases 

with 3 or fewer samples), yielding 12,938 cases covering 3,727 diseases. Within RareArena, two 

tasks were involved. One is rare disease screening task (RDS) evaluating diagnosis intuition by 6

simulating early -stage scenarios where physicians need to identify potential diseases from vague 

clinical signals. The other is rare disease confirmation (RDC), which assesses diagnosis accuracy 

with decisive evidence provided 25 . Second, we performed external validation by collecting real -

world EHRs of rare disease patients from four centers (detailed demographic characteristics are 

presented in Extended Data Table. 1). Third, despite our focus on free -text input, we incorporated 

RareBench (1,196 cases) 26 and Reese et al. (5,213 cases) 27 to assess the model’s adaptability to 

structured phenotype inputs, benchmarking against established phenotype -based diagnostic 

systems. 

We benchmarked our model against 1) leading open -source general LLMs, including DeepSeek -

R1 22 and gpt -oss 28 ; 2) latest LLMs featuring advanced clinical reasoning capacities, including 

HuatuoGPT -o1 29 , m1 30 , and Baichuan -M2 31 ; 3) phenotype -centered diagnostic systems, including 

PhenoBrain 13 , Exomiser 14 , Pub Case Finder 32 and LIRICAL 33 .

Cross -sectional diagnostic evaluation of RaDaR on public and external datasets 

Our model, RaDaR, demonstrated the strongest overall diagnostic performance among evaluated 

open -source models across internal, external, and public benchmarks, indicating its specialized 

clinical reasoning capabilities and supporting its potential as a cl inical decision -support tool (Fig. 

2). We used top -5 recall as the primary diagnostic performance metric, reflecting the intended 

clinical use of RaDaR: to assist clinicians by prioritizing a short differential diagnosis list rather 

than replacing clinical judgment with a single definitive answer. The output length was fixed at 

five to bala nce coverage and clinical usability: it is sufficiently broad to capture plausible 

alternatives while remaining concise enough for clinicians to review. Top -1 and top -3 recall were 

additionally reported to provide a more comprehensive characterization of model performance 

(Extended Data Table. 2). 

First, in the RareArena hold -out evaluation, the model ranked first f or open -source diagnostic 

systems, achieving 42.53% diagnostic accuracy in RDS. The performance surpassed both the 

leading open -source general LLMs (gpt -oss -120b: 38.40%; DeepSeek -R1: 35.52%) and the top -

tier medical -domain model, Baichuan -M2 (28.53%). In RDC, it secured the highest diagnostic 

accuracy (70.34%) among all evaluated models. Notably, this performance advantage was 7

achieved despite RaDaR’s relatively compact size, supporting its potential for local clinical 

deployment (Fig. 2a). We explored RaDaR’s reasoning traces and found that they generally 

followed a clinically recognizable diagnostic workflow: summarizing key clinical findings, 

generating differential diagnoses, and analyzing the likelihood of each possibility (examples 

show n in Appendix A -C). 

We also evaluated the model’s performance across different disease subgroups. In terms of 

prevalence, RaDaR consistently outperformed all other models in RDS tasks across disease 

subgroups with varying prevalence rates (Extended Data Fig. 1). Its advantage was most 

pronounced in the rarest cases, where it surpassed the second -best model by 1.07% for diseases 

affecting 1 –5 per 10,000 people, and by 6.90% for ultra -rare diseases affecting 1 per 1,000,000. In 

RDC, though not achieving the best performance in every prevalence subgroup, RaDaR ha d

performance comparable to that of DeepSeek -R1 and gpt -oss. We next assessed performance 

across different clinical specialties (Extended Data Fig. 2,3). In RDS, RaDaR consistently 

outperformed all open -source comparators across every specialty. In RDC, this advantage was 

preserved for most specialties, with a modestly lower performance in rare hepatic and respiratory 

diseases. Finally, stratification by genetic status (genetic vs non -genetic) and multisystem 

involvement (present vs absent) showed a consistent pattern, with RaDaR outperforming baseline 

models across all subgroups in both tasks (Extended Data Fig. 4). 

Second, external validation on multicenter real -world patient records supported RaDaR’s 

robustness under distributional shifts. Despite substantial heterogeneity in real -world clinical 

documentation, RaDaR achieved a diagnostic accuracy of 66.92% (± 0.35) on the PUMCH 

(Peking Union Medical College Hospital) dataset, outperforming DeepSeek -R1 (61.80% ± 0.46) 

and gpt -oss -120b (62.13% ± 0.63). Similarly, RaDaR attained the highest accuracy on XHCMU 

(Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University), XJH (Xijing Hospital) and KKH (KK Women's 

and Children's Hospital) datasets with 72.57%, 84.07% and 48.08% accuracy respectively. 

Collectively, these results support RaDaR’s generalizability beyond the public case -report 

training distribution and underscore its potential for local clinical deployment (Fig. 2b, Extended 

Data Table. 2). 8

Third, in phenotype -input benchmark evaluations, RaDaR demonstrated strong versatility despite 

being optimized for free -text clinical records (Fig. 2c, Extended Data Table. 2). On RareBench, 

RaDaR achieved the second -best diagnostic accuracy of 53.93%, outperforming all LLMs except 

gpt -oss (55.02%) and all traditional phenotype -centered tools. On the Reese et al. benchmark, 

RaDaR achieved the highest accuracy (48.17%), outperforming both LLM -based models and 

phenotype -centered tools. 

Free -text reasoning complements phenotype -centered rare -disease diagnosis 

Because rare -disease diagnosis has traditionally relied on phenotype extraction and ontology -

based prioritization, we directly compared three diagnostic strategies: traditional phenotype -

centered tools, phenotype -centered agent systems, and free -text reaso ning approaches (Extended 

Data Table. 3). Across the three external validation datasets, full -text RaDaR achieved the best 

overall performance, exceed ing the phenotype -centered agent system DeepRare by 34.69, 35.43, 

and 21.11 percentage points in PUMCH, XHCMU, and XJH respectively. Case -level analysis 

suggested that this performance gap was partly attributable to inaccurate phenotype extraction 

and the loss of key diagnostic information during phenotype encoding (Appendix D). 

Consistently, RaDaR p erformed substantially worse when restricted to phenotype -only inputs 

than when provided with full -text clinical records in external validation. Phenotype -only input 

reduced RaDaR’s performance from 66.92% to 35.07% in PUMCH, from 72.57% to 28.57% in 

XHCMU , and from 84.07% to 55.56% in XJH. These findings should not be interpreted as 

diminishing the value of phenotype -centered methods; rather, they suggest that free -text 

reasoning can complement ontology -based diagnostic frameworks by preserving narrative 

clinical context, particularly in real -world clinical settings where phenotypes are incompletely 

documented or variably encoded. 

RaDaR prioritizes final diagnoses earlier along retrospective diagnostic trajectories 

Despite RaDaR’s satisfactory performance on cross -sectional case -level evaluation, its potential 

value along diagnostic workflows requires clinically grounded evaluation. We therefore conducted 

two studies to systematically characterize its clinical potent ial. First, to estimate whether RaDaR 

could prioritize the final diagnosis earlier along real diagnostic trajectories, we performed a 

retrospective cumulative -visit evaluation of patients with confirmed rare diseases and multiple 9

prior undiagnosed encounters. We applied RaDaR at each clinical encounter to generate a 

differential diagnosis list with no more than 10 diseases. The visit at which clinicians first 

documented suspicion of the final rare disease served as the physician baseline. Reviewers then 

manually determined the earliest visit at which RaDaR correctly identified the final diagnosis, 

enabling a direct comparison of whether, and by how many visits, the model prioritized the final 

diagnosis before documented clinical suspicion (Fig. 3a). Importantly, this evaluation was not 

designed to test longitudinal reasoning per se, but rather to provide a clinically interpretable 

estimate of the potential diagnostic benefit of RaDaR in real -world diagnostic trajectories. 

A total of 113 patients were enrolled (86 from PUMCH and 27 from XHCMU). The cohort 

included 50 male and 63 female participants, with the mean age of symptom onset at 31.07 ± 22.00 

years (Extended Data Table. 4). Genetic diseases accounted for 32.74% of the cohort, and 49.56% 

of cases involved multiple systems. Following previous work 34 , the diagnostic trajectory was 

divided into two distinct intervals: (1) the pre -center interval, defined as the time from symptom 

onset to the initial visit at a participating center; and (2) the within -center interval, defined as the 

time from that first visit to the point of clinical suspici on. The total diagnostic duration was 

calculated as the sum of these two intervals, encompassing the entire period from symptom onset 

to diagnostic suspicion. The mean total diagnostic duration was 46.14 ± 70.36 months. Specifically, 

the pre -center interva l lasted 40.36 ± 68.91 months, and 95.58% of patients had sought medical 

consultations at other institutions before presenting to the participating centers. Even within these 

centers, patients underwent an average of 4.46 ± 4.17 clinical visits over 5.78 ± 12.37 months 

before diagnostic suspicion was established. 

RaDaR outperformed the gpt -oss and DeepSeek -R1 in this evaluation. Using the visit -normalized 

diagnostic advancement score (VNDAS), which quantifies how much earlier a model can identify 

the correct diagnosis along the diagnostic trajectory, RaDaR achieved a score of 0.47, compared 

with 0.41 for gpt -oss and 0.37 for DeepSeek -R1 (Fig. 3b). RaDaR correctly identified the final 

diagnosis before clinical suspicion in 61.06% of cases and at the same visit in 25.66%, while failing 

to identify the diagnosis in only 13.27% of cases, outperforming both gpt -oss an d DeepSeek -R1 

(Fig. 3c). Within this retrospective framework, RaDaR prioritized the final diagnosis 1.62 visits 

before documented clinical suspicion (95% CI: 1.22 –2.02), corresponding to a potential lead time 

of 1.87 months (95% CI: 0. 55 –3. 21 ). When normalized at the patient level by each individual’s 10 

within -centre diagnostic interval, this translated into a mean patient -level lead -time ratio of 50.18% 

(95% CI: 41.42 –58.93). As illustrated by the heatmaps (Fig. 3d), although most early detections 

clustered within the immediate 1 –2 visits preceding the clinical diagnosis, a subset of patients 

showed a markedly longer lead time. Specifically, 11.50% (13/113) of the cohort had a correct 

model prediction more than 3 months before clinical suspicion, and 4.42% (5/113) more than 10 

months in advance. In terms of clinical encounters, RaDaR prioritized the diagnosis more than 

three visits earlier in 23.89% (27/113) of patients and by m ore than six visits in 3.54% (4/113) of 

patients. Considering that physicians may not be able to evaluate all differential diagnos es

suggested by the model, we also reported performance under constrained settings in which only 

the top one, three, and five differential diagnoses were considered (Extended Data Table. 5). 

We further characterized the flow of clinical information throughout the diagnostic journey and 

explored which types of information changes were associated with diagnostic transitions. As 

illustrated by a representative patient, clinical information was dy namically accumulated and 

updated over time: symptoms and laboratory findings were more frequently newly added, whereas 

treatments and laboratory findings were more often updated (Extended Data Fig. 5). We next 

investigated which types of clinical information changes were associated with incorrect -to -correct 

diagnostic transitions. Each additional newly added imaging or procedural item was significantly 

associated with an incorrect -to -correct diagnostic transition (OR = 1.15, P = 0.030) , whereas no 

significant associations were observed for other information types (P > 0.05). We further conducted 

subgroup analyses to assess the stability of model performance across disease categories. Model 

performance, measured by both diagnostic advancement score and diagnostic advancement ratio, 

was not significantly associated with disease etiology (both P > 0.05; Extended Data Fig. 6). 

RaDaR assistance improves physicians’ rare -disease diagnostic accuracy 

To evaluate whether RaDaR can assist physicians in an interactive manner , we conducted a 

randomized physician -assistance trial comparing RaDaR -assisted diagnosis with a conventional 

internet -search strategy. Participating physicians from neurology, internal medicine, and 

pediatrics —three specialties in which rare diseases are most frequently encountered —were asked 

to diagnose five department -specific cases. Participants were randomized at the physici an level to 

one of two arms: a control group with access to the internet alone, and a RaDaR -assisted group 

with access to both RaDaR and the internet. In total, 84 physicians from 28 hospitals were enrolled 11 

and randomized, of whom 76 completed the trial. Among those who completed the trial, 40 were 

assigned to the control arm and 36 to the RaDaR -assisted arm (Extended Data Fig. 7). The median 

clinical experience was 4 years (interquartile range [IQR], 2 –9). Baseline characteristics are 

summarized in Extended Data Table. 6. 

Baseline unassisted diagnostic performance did not differ significantly between the control and 

RaDaR -assisted arms (11.50 ± 14.24 vs. 13.33 ± 16.56, P = 0.60). In the assisted setting, however, 

physicians in the RaDaR -assisted group achieved significantly higher diagnostic accuracy than 

those in the control group (49.44 ± 22.67 vs. 28.00 ± 22.10; absolute difference, 21.44; 95% CI, 

11.20 –31.68; P < 0.0001). Diagnostic time did not differ between groups (control: 3.69 ± 3.12 

minutes; RaDaR: 3.82 ± 2.36 minu tes ; absolute difference, 0.14 ; 95% CI, -1.14 –1.41 ; P = 0.8332 ). 

Self -reported helpfulness was higher with RaDaR than with conventional search (4.19 ± 0.63 vs. 

3.36 ± 0.80; absolute difference, 0.83; 95% CI, 0.50 –1.16; P < 0.0001) (Fig. 4). 

We next examined whether the benefit of RaDaR varied across physician subgroups. Descriptively, 

RaDaR -assisted diagnosis showed higher diagnostic accuracy than the control arm across 

physician -experience strata and in most specialty subgroups (Fig. 4e, f). No significant interaction 

was observed between intervention group and physician experience (OR = 0.84, P = 0.695) or 

department, including internal medicine (OR = 0.90, P = 0.827) and neurology (OR = 0.35, P = 

0.135), with pediatrics as the reference group. 

We also conducted an exploratory safety -related analysis of physician confidence and diagnostic 

calibration. Self -reported confidence was collected after each case and calibration error was 

defined as the discrepancy between confidence and accuracy (details in Methods). We found that 

calibration error was significantly higher in the RaDaR -assisted arm during the assisted phase 

(0.48 ± 0.15 vs . 0.39 ± 0.17, P = 0.02). A case -level descriptive analysis further showed that, among 

incorrectly diagnosed cases, high or very high confidence scores (4 or 5) were more frequent in 

the RaDaR -assisted arm than in the control arm (65.9% vs. 27.1%). Among c orrectly diagnosed 

cases, both arms showed similarly high confidence levels. These findings indicate that improved 

diagnostic accuracy may be accompanied by a calibration trade -off, with incorrect diagnoses more 

frequently accompanied by high confidence (E xtended Data Fig. 8). 

Synthetic narratives mitigate data scarcity and support performance scaling 12 

To systematically quantify the contribution of our synthetic data and to explore the potential of 

the data synthesis pipeline, we conducted a series of ablation studies using a scaled -down model 

(DeepSeek -R1 -Distill -Qwen -14B). Specifically, we benchmarked three distinct training 

paradigms: the "real -world" setting (trained exclusively on real -world case reports), the "real -

world + synthetic" setting (trained on real -world case reports supplemented by synthetic data), 

and the experimental "synthetic -only" se tting (trained solely on synthetic data). 

First, we evaluated the impact of data augmentation. Compared to the "real -world" setting, the 

model augmented with synthetic data showed a consistent performance increase (Fig . 5a). The 

performance gain showed an inverse pattern with the availability of authentic data, and the effect 

of our approach was most pronounced in the ultra -rare regime (Bin "0"). In this data -sparse 

scenario, the inclusion of synthetic data yielded a subs tantial improvement of +7.31 percentage 

points in diagnostic accuracy (Fig. 5b). As visualized in Extended Data Fig. 9, the injection of 

synthetic data effectively transforms the original extreme long -tail distribution into a more 

balanced distribution. In addition to the availability of authentic data, we also examined the 

training -data distribution and model performance across disease -prevalence groups (Extended 

Data Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 ). Authentic data covered only a small fraction of ultra -rare diseases 

(3.5% in diseases with prevalence <1/1 000 000) , while incorporating synthetic data substantially 

expanded the disease coverage to 32.84%. Correspondingly, we observed the largest 

performance gain in the ultra -rare subgroup, with an improvement of 7.32% in diagnostic 

accuracy. This suggested that incorporating synthetic data may help alleviate performance 

disparities caused by limited coverage and skewed training distributions. 

Notably , under the "synthetic -only" paradigm, we observed a notable result: the model trained 

solely on synthetic data achieved a diagnostic accuracy of 39.08%, comparable to "real -world" 

setting (37.58%) trained on authentic case reports, suggesting that phenoty pe -anchored synthetic 

narratives can provide useful training signal (Fig. 5c). Similar performance patterns were also 

observed across three external datasets, suggesting that the utility of synthetic -data training may 

extend to external clinical datasets ( Extended Data Fig. 11). Furthermore, even for the subset of 

diseases where synthesis was infeasible due to missing Orpha net annotations, the model 

demonstrated non -trivial diagnostic generalization. While performance on these non -synthesized 

conditions was naturally lower, likely reflecting their inherent obscurity, the model still exhibited 13 

significant improvement compared to the baseline, suggesting potential transfer to diseases not 

directly represented in the synthetic -data generation process (Fig. 5d). 

Finally, we examined the scalability of this approach by varying the amount of synthetic training 

data. Across the tested range of 1 to 30 synthetic samples per disease, diagnostic performance 

increased monotonically as synthetic -data volume grew and followed a positive power -law 

scaling trend (scaling exponent, 0.082; 95% CI, 0.070 –0.095; R 2 = 0.99 for RareArena; scaling 

exponent, 0.056; 95% CI, 0.013 –0.100; R 2 = 0.85 for external validation datasets) (Fig. 5e, 

Extended Data Fig. 11). Although computational constraints precluded further extrapolation, this 

trend suggests a scalable path for improving model performance through further expansion of 

synthetic training data. 

Discussion 

In this study, we developed and released RaDaR, a specialized open -source compact LLM for rare 

disease diagnosis. The model outperformed the evaluated open -source models, including 

DeepSeek -R1, in both public benchmarks and four external validation centers . More importantly, 

RaDaR provided evidence of potential diagnostic lead time in a retrospective cohort study and 

demonstrated potential to support physicians’ clinical diagnosis in a randomized physician -

assistance trial. Finally, the synthetic data construction pipeline has demonstrated its utility, 

transferability, and scalability, providing a framework for future rare disease LLM developmen t

under data scarcity. 

Many rare disease diagnostic pipelines, ranging from Exomiser -like tools to recent agentic 

frameworks, rely heavily on phenotype extraction and ontology -based term standardization for 

disease prioritization. As a result, their performance is inherently sen sitive to both the accuracy of 

phenotype extraction and the completeness of existing disease –phenotype knowledge bases. In 

contrast, RaDaR directly processes free -text clinical records and demonstrates generalizability to 

diseases with no phenotype mapping information (Fig. 5d), allowing it to better adapt to the 

complex real -world clinical scenarios. The results do not imply that phenotype -centered 

approaches are inherently inferior. Indeed, LIRICAL achieved the highest top -1 recall on 

RareBench among all evaluated methods, including all LLMs, demonstrating the potential of 

phenotype -centered approach, consistent with previous studies 27 . Rather than replacing 14 

phenotype -based methods, our findings suggest that integrating phenotype -centered approaches 

with free -text reasoning may represent a promising direction for future rare -disease diagnostic 

systems. Some studies have already explored the potential of LLMs t o improve automated 

phenotyping 35,36 Similarly, we believe RaDaR could complement the current rare disease 

diagnostic paradigm through its free -text processing and reasoning capacity, and may serve as a 

flexible reasoning module that can be integrated into ontology -based or agent -based rare disease 

diagnostic workflows. 

Beyond RaDaR’s diagnostic performance, our work addresses the key challenges limiting the 

application of large language models in rare diseases: insufficient clinical deployability, limited 

evidence of clinical utility, and scarcity of training data. First , RaDaR ’s 32B -parameter scale 

enables efficient in -hospital deployment while delivering performance that rivals or even exceeds 

much larger general -purpose models. Unlike prohibitive ultra -large models that are often 

inaccessible to resource -constrained clinical s ettings, RaDaR offers a stronger performance –

efficiency trade -off, broadening access to high -quality diagnostic decision support. Moreover, the 

open -source design of RaDaR also supports privacy -preserving local deployment, allowing 

hospitals to maintain greater con trol over data governance and model use 37 -39 .

Second, RaDaR provided more clinically grounded evidence of its potential utility than previous 

work. Prior studies have predominantly evaluated models using static, single -encounter records 

from a single center, an approach that facilitates benchmarking but offers limited insight into 

real -world clinical utility. In our study, we evaluated RaDaR at multiple time points along a 

dynamic and iterative diagnostic trajectory, offering a clinically interpretable estimate of 

potential d iagnostic lead time (Fig. 3). We found that RaDaR indeed demonstrated substantial 

promise for earlier diagnostic prioritization. For example, in a patient with a 16 -year history of 

left -sided lipomatous overgrowth and negative results from prior peripheral -blood whole -exome 

sequencing and mitochondrial testing, RaDaR proposed “PIK3CA -related overgrowth spectrum” 

at the first encounter. This hypothesis was subsequently supported by genetic testing performed 

on a soft -tissue biopsy several months later, after physicians considered the diagnosis at the 

fourth clinical visit. The diagnostic challenge in this case lies in the somatic nature of the 

disease -causing mutation, which is frequently missed by routine peripheral -blood exome 

sequencing. If such prioritiza tion were acted upon in clinical practice, clinicians might consider 15 

targeted testing earlier, thereby potentially shortening the diagnostic journey. Further, while the 

absolute cohort size is constrained, it is 15 -fold larger than that of the previous studies employing 

comparable validation strategies 40 . To move beyond retrospective cohort validation, which 

evaluates model performance but cannot assess whether clinicians would use model suggestions 

in iterative real -world decision -making, we conducted a randomized physician -assistance trial 

showing that RaDaR improved physicians’ rare -disease diagnostic performance. We also 

revealed potential safety signals, most notably an increase in calibration error, that warrant 

caution in future deployment. Because rare -disease diagnosis is protracted a nd eligible patients 

are intrinsically scarce 41,42 , an RCT fully embedded in routine clinical care could take years to 

mature. Our current clinical validation provides an early and practical view of both the promise 

and the guardrails required for RaDaR -enabled rare -disease diagnosis. 

Third, beyond clinical deployment, we developed a data synthesis pipeline that showed utility and 

transferability to future LLM training. By translating structured knowledge bases into clinically 

realistic reasoning narratives, we generated phenotype -anchored synthetic cases and found that a 

model trained exclusively on synthetic data achieved performance comparable to that of a mo del 

trained solely on real -world case reports. This finding suggests that phenotype -anchored synthesis 

is not merely a data augmentation strategy, but a practical solution to mitigating the inherent 

scarcity and extreme long -tail distribution of rare disease data . Furthermore, the observed scaling 

trends suggest that increasing the volume of high -quality synthetic data provides a predictable path 

to enhancing performance. This paradigm effectively decouples dependence on large real -world 

datasets, offering a scalable and privacy -preserving roadmap for supporting more accessible model 

development across diverse, data -scarce clinical domains. 

Limitations 

Our study has several limitations. First, despite combining synthetic and real -world case reports 

and covering 5,877 diseases, nearly 2,000 rare diseases remain unrepresented in the training set 

due to the absence of phenotype –disease knowledge for ultra -rare conditions. Future work should 

expand knowledge coverage and develop alternative strategies to fill these gaps. Second, the 

current model is purely language -based and does not incorporate multimodal clinical data, which 

may provide more detailed inform ation for rare disease diagnosis. Third, owing to the highly 

fragmented nature of the rare disease diagnostic journey and limited EHR interoperability, 16 

reconstructing a patient’s complete trajectory across multiple institutions remains a significant 

challenge. In this study, data derived from top -tier tertiary centers represent only the final stage of 

a much longer diagnostic process. Consequently, the tr ue 'add -on' effect of RaDaR may be 

underestimated if deployed earlier and more broadly across the healthcare ecosystem. The 

constraints we encountered underscore the urgent need for integrated rare -disease data 

infrastructures in future research. Fourth, s ince several benchmark cases were derived from public 

case reports, and the base model was pretrained on large -scale public corpora, benchmark 

contamination cannot be fully excluded. We attempted to mitigate this risk by using rephrased 

benchmark narrative s (RareArena) and evaluating non -public external EHR cohorts. Nevertheless, 

these analyses cannot guarantee complete absence of pretraining exposure. Future validation 

should prioritize prospectively collected, non -public and multi -institutional cases. Fif th, our 

benchmark evaluation relied on three -level or binary scoring paradigms, which may not fully 

capture the nuances of model performance. Future work should develop more comprehensive, 

precise, and automated evaluation frameworks for free -text diagnost ic outputs. Sixth, although we 

incorporated a multi -visit EHR evaluation, we did not explicitly incorporate longitudinal modeling 

into the training process. This remains an important direction for future exploration. Seventh, while 

our retrospective analys es and RCT suppor ted RaDaR ’s clinical potential , whether this translates 

into meaningful clinical benefit, including changes in testing, referral, treatment, or patient 

outcomes, requires rigorous, long -term prospective validation. The randomized physician -

assistance trial was a controlled case -based s tudy rather than a pragmatic trial embedded in routine 

clinical workflows, and the exploratory calibration findings highlight the need for safeguards 

against overconfidence and automation bias before deployment. 

Conclusion 

In conclusion, we developed and released RaDaR, a specialized open -source and compact 32B 

LLM for rare disease diagnosis, achieving leading performance across public benchmarks and 

multi -center real -world cohorts. Our clinical evaluation demonstrated RaDaR’s potential to 

prioritize final diagnoses earlier along retrospective diagnostic trajectories and to support 

physicians’ diagnostic performance, as supported by a randomized physician -assistance trial. In 

parallel , our phenotype -anchored synthetic data pipeline offers a scalable and reproducible 

solution to addressing rare disease data scarcity and long -tail imbalance. Beyond developing a 17 

deployable reasoning model with clinically grounded evidence of potential, this work offers a 

reproducible and scalable paradigm for building future clinical reasoning models in data -scarce 

settings. 

Data availability 

Simulated phenotype sets were generated using publicly available data from Orpha net 

(https://www.orpha.net/) and the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO; https://hpo.jax.org/). The 

RareArena dataset used for both model training and benchmarking is open -source and publicly 

available (https://github.com/zhao -zy15/RareArena). The two phenotype -based rare disease 

benchmarks are also publicly available: RareBench (https://github.com/chenxz1111/RareBench) 

and the dataset described by Reese et al. (https://zenodo.org/records/15324355). Due to privacy 

concerns, the in -house datasets used for external validation and retrospective analyses are not 

publicly available. A ccess may be considered upon reasonable request to the corresponding author 

with a clear research proposal and data -use plan. The processed analysis data and de -identified raw 

data from the randomized physician -assistance trial are also available from the corresponding 

author upon reasonable request. 

Code availability 

The model weights and full training datasets are both available on Hugging Face 

(https://huggingface.co/sczzz/RaDaR -32B) . The training scripts and synthetic -data construction 

code are available on GitHub (https://github.com/sczzz3/RaDaR ). The web application 

developed for this study is hosted at https://raredx.datummed.com .

Contributors 

TYW had full access to all of the data in the study and took responsibility for the integrity of the 

data and the accuracy of the data analysis. HC, SZ, and ZZ conceived and planned this study. HC, 

SZ, and ZZ drafted the manuscript. HC and SZ did the data synthesis. SZ trained the model. HC, 

SZ, and ZZ did data interpretation. HC, XJ, JZ and SH organized the external validation and 

retrospective cohort study. SH, XJ and SM evaluated the case quality. HC , XJ, JZ, SH, SM and 

DZ designed and participated the randomized AI physician -assistance trial . All authors contributed 18 

to the intellectual development of this study and provided critical feedback on the manuscript. All 

authors had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision to 

submit for publication. 

Declaration of interests 

TYW declares consulting fees from Aldropika Therapeutics, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, 

Genentech, Iveric Bio, Novartis, Plano, Oxurion , Roche, Sanofi, and Shanghai Henlius; funding 

from the National Key R&D Program, China (grant number 2022YFC2502802); and being an 

inventor, patent holder, and cofounder of the start -up companies EyRiS and Visre. All other authors 

declare no competing int erests. 

Acknowledgments 

TYW received funding from National Key R & D Program of China (2022YFC2502802), National 

Natural Science Fund of China (8238810007) and Beijing Natural Science Foundation (IS23096). 

SY received funding from the Natural Science Foundation of China (12171270 ). SYZ received 

funding from National Key R &D Program of China (2022ZD0116001). The GPU computing 

resources were supported by the High -Performance Computing Center of Tsinghua University. 

Method 

Datasets 

In this study, we used several publicly available rare disease benchmarks (both free -text based and 

phenotype -based) and also in -house rare disease cases to evaluate the performance of the baseline 

methods and RaDaR. 

RareArena 25 is a comprehensive rare disease diagnostic dataset based on free -text modality 

comprising 49,760 cases for the rare disease screening (RDS) task and 22,901 cases for the rare 

disease confirmation (RDC) task, covering more than 4,000 diseases . There are two subtasks: Rare 19 

Disease Screening (RDS), where the cases are truncated up to any diagnostic tests, such as whole -

genome sequencing for genetic diseases and pathogen detection for rare infections, and Rare 

Disease Confirmation (RDC), where the cases are truncated up to the final diagnosis. 

RareBench 26 is a phenotype -based benchmark designed to systematically evaluate the capabilities 

of LLMs from four distinct perspectives in the context of rare diseases. In this work, we focused 

specifically on Task 4: Differential Diagnosis among Universal Rare Diseas es. 

Reese et al 27 . is another phenotype -based benchmark comprised of 5,213 solved rare disease cases, 

along with basic demographic and onset information. The cohort covers 378 Mendelian and 

chromosomal disorders curated from 726 published studies. Only phenotype data were u sed for 

analysis, providing a standardized benchmark for evaluating rare -disease diagnostic methods. 

In -house dataset . Electronic health records (EHRs) from four tertiary centers were collected: 

Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH), Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University 

(XHCMU), Xijing Hospital (XJH) and KK Women's and Children's Hospital (KKH). After 

remo ving duplicates, we retrospectively collected inpatient admission records from PUMCH 

(September 2024 to July 2025), XHCMU (February 2025 to May 2025), XJH (February 2025 to 

June 2025) and KKH (January 2015 to December 2020). Patients were included if they had a 

confirmed rare disease diagnosis. Diagnoses were manually extracted and annotated by clinical 

experts. To prevent label leakage, if the diagnosis explicitly appeared in the EMR, we truncated 

the record immediately before its first explicit mention an d used only the preceding text for 

evaluation. If no explicit diagnosis appeared in the admission record, we used the full record. 

Model performance evaluation 

For RareArena, we largely followed the original evaluation protocol. In the original RareArena 

benchmark, predictions were scored on a three -level scale: 2 for an exact or synonymous match, 

1 for a hypernym match, and 0 for an unrelated answer. Scoring was performed automatically by 

GPT -4o, which demonstrated satisfactory agreement with two clinician reviewers, with kappa 

values of 0.95 and 0.97 for top -1 scoring and 0.83 and 0.87 for top -5 scoring. These values were 

comparable to the inter -clinician agreem ent (0.89) 25 .

Here, we made the hypernym criterion more stringent. Rather than accepting broad parent disease 

categories, we restricted valid hypernyms using the Orpha net classification file 20 

(https://sciences.orphadata.com/classifications/). A prediction was counted as a hypernym only 

when it corresponded to an upper -level disease concept with fewer than 10 daughter disorder 

concepts. For example, for “Long chain 3-hydroxyacyl -CoA dehydrogenas e deficiency 

(ORPHA: 5)”, “3 -hydroxyacyl -CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (ORPHA:309127)” can be 

accepted as valid hypernyms, whereas “Metabolic disease with cataract (ORPHA: 98644)” cannot. 

Answers that were more specific than the reference diagnosis were considered unrelated and 

assigned a score of 0. The updated scoring prompt is provided in Appendix J, and the Orpha net -

based hypernym mapping file is available on GitHub ( https://github.com/zhao -zy15/RareArena ). 

For the in -house validation datasets, real -world clinical diagnoses were not always directly 

mappable to Orpha net codes, making hypernym -based scoring hard. We therefore adopted a binary 

evaluation paradigm. A prediction was considered correct only if it exactly matched, or was 

synonymous with, the real -world reference diagnosis; otherwise, it was considered incorr ect. The 

corresponding evaluation prompt is provided in Appendix K. 

Baselines 

Phenotype -based diagnostic tools 

PhenoBrain 13 is a phenotype -based diagnostic pipeline that extracts structured clinical phenotypes 

from electronic health records using a BERT -based model and ranks candidate rare diseases via an 

ensemble of specialized predictors, serving as a strong non -LLM baseline for differential diagnosis 

of rare diseases. 

Pubcasefinder 32 is a phenotype -driven rare disease diagnostic system that matches patient 

phenotypes encoded as HPO terms against curated case reports and disease databases, ranking 

candidate rare diseases based on phenotype similarity. 

Exomiser 14 prioritizes candidate disease -causing variants from whole -exome or whole -genome 

sequencing data by combining phenotype data with variant filtering and network analysis. It 

annotates and filters variants based on frequency and predicted pathogenicity, then ranks genes by 

integrating phenotype similarity via HPO comparisons and model organism data and network 

proximity scores. We used the phenotype -only mode for benchmarking. 21 

LIRICAL 33 prioritizes candidate diseases through an interpretable likelihood -ratio framework 

using HPO -coded phenotypic abnormalities. It estimates how each clinical feature contributes to 

the support for or against each diagnosis and reports ranked candidate disea ses with likelihood -

based scores and posterior probabilities. 

Advanced large language models 

DeepSeek -R1 22 is an open -source reasoning -focused large language model trained with large -scale 

reinforcement learning with 671 billion parameters. It exhibits strong performance on tasks 

requiring mathematical reasoning and structured problem solving. 

gpt -oss 28 is the OpenAI’s open -weight large language models trained with instruction tuning for 

general -purpose language understanding and generation. It serves as a strong open -source baseline 

for evaluating reasoning and generation performance across a wide range of tasks. We used the 

120 billion parameter version for benchmarking and set the reasoning effort as "high". 

HuatuoGPT -o1 29 is a series of open -source medical LLMs fine -tuned for advanced medical 

reasoning. It is designed to generate extended and reflective reasoning before answering for 

complex medical problems. We used the 72 billion parameter version, which is fine -tuned on 

Qwen2.5 -72B. 

m1 30 is a 32B -parameter open -source medical LLM fine -tuned with only 1,000 high -quality 

medical reasoning examples and enhanced via a test -time scaling strategy that extends inference -

time thinking. 

Baichuan -M2 31 is a 32 -billion -parameter open -source language model fine -tuned for medical -

enhanced reasoning. Built on top of Qwen2.5 -32B with a novel Large Verifier System and multi -

stage reinforcement learning, it targets real -world clinical decision -making and domai n-specific 

inference while retaining strong general capabilities. 

Evaluation of diagnostic approaches across phenotype - and text -based paradigms 

To evaluate the performance of different technical approaches in AI -facilitated rare disease 

diagnosis, we compared phenotype -based and text -based diagnostic paradigms. The phenotype -22 

based paradigm included both traditional phenotype -centered tools and phenotype -centered agent 

systems. 

For the traditional phenotype -centered approach, clinical phenotypes were first extracted from case 

descriptions using PhenoTagger and then used as input for phenotype -based diagnostic tools, 

including PhenoBrain, PubCaseFinder, Exomiser and LIRICAL, to retrieve candidate diagnoses. 

For the phenotype -centered agent system, we included DeepRare as a representative baseline for 

rare disease diagnosis 20 . DeepRare uses a multi -agent LLM framework to integrate clinical 

phenotypes, HPO terms and, when available, genomic information, producing a ranked list of 

candidate diseases with evidence -supported reasoning. In our experiments, we followed the 

original DeepRare configuration, including all default settings and the use of DeepSeek -V3 as the 

LLM backbone. However, two components could not be fully replicated. First, PubCaseFinder 

was temporarily unavailable during our evaluation and was therefore excluded (May, 2026). 

Second, for similar -case retrieval, the original authors only released the RareArena RDS 

embedding dataset; therefore, the case bank was restricted to this dataset. DeepRare was not 

evaluated on RareArena because its per -case reasoning time wa s approximately 5 –10 minutes, 

making large -scale evaluation across more than 10,000 cases computationally impractical. 

For the text -based paradigm, we included RaDaR as the representative model, given its strong 

performance across multiple rare disease diagnostic benchmarks. 

Real -world training data selection 

RareArena encompasses a large number of valuable real -world rare disease cases for model 

development. Thus, we meticulously selected a subset of RareArena as the training set. We first 

randomly selected up to three cases per disorder and subgroup disorder as validation tests and used 

the remaining cases for training. We denote the curated real -world training set as 𝒟 !"#$ .

Synthetic data curation 

However, we observed that the number of real -world cases per rare disease follows a highly 

long -tailed distribution, which can hinder the model’s ability to learn reliable diagnostic patterns 23 

for underrepresented diseases. To alleviate this imbalance, we leveraged authoritative rare -

disease knowledge bases —Orpha net and the Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) —together with 

an advanced LLM to synthesize realistic rare -disease case summaries. These synthetic cases 

were designed to improve diagnostic coverage for long -tail rare diseases. 

Orpha net provides curated disease --phenotype associations annotated with qualitative frequency 

labels. For a target disease 𝑦 , we constructed a synthetic phenotype set through the following 

streamlined multi -stage procedure. Let 𝒫 (𝑦 ) denote the set of all non -excluded Orpha net 

phenotypes associated with disease 𝑦 .

Primary clinical anchors (𝒫 %!&' )

From phenotypes labeled as Obligate , Very frequent , or Frequent , we uniformly sampled 

(without replacement) up to three phenotypes to form 𝒫 %!&' . A small -size cap was enforced 

when the phenotype candidate pool is overly small. 

Frequency -aware sampling (𝒫 )

For each remaining phenotype in 𝒫 (𝑦 ) ∖ 𝒫 %!&' , we converted its qualitative frequency label 

into an inclusion probability and performed Bernoulli sampling, yielding the set 𝒫 .

Hypernym abstraction (𝒫 ()%"! )

To model imprecise clinical descriptions, we replaced a small number (at most three, scaled to 

|𝒫 |) of phenotypes in 𝒫 with their immediate HPO parents, forming 𝒫 ()%"! .

Differential -diagnosis noise (𝒫 *+&,) )

We injected a few confusing phenotypes sampled from diseases that share phenotypes with 𝑦 ,

replacing their originating phenotypes to obtain 𝒫 *+&,) .

Set -level dropout (𝒫 -""% )

Let 𝒫 $"./ denote the phenotype set after hypernym replacement and noise injection. To emulate 

incomplete clinical documentation, we applied a size -dependent set -level dropout by uniformly 

subsampling 𝒫 $"./ with a retention ratio 𝑟 (𝑛 ), where 24 

𝑟 (𝑛 ) ∼ +

{1.0}, 𝑛 < 10 ,

{1.0, 0.8}, 10 ≤ 𝑛 < 20 ,

{1.0, 0.8, 0.5}, 𝑛 ≥ 20 ,

with each value chosen uniformly from the corresponding set. The resulting phenotype set was 

denoted as 𝒫 -""% .

The final phenotype set for a synthetic case was constructed as 

𝒫 0&*#$ = 𝒫 %!&' ∪ 𝒫 ()%"! ∪ 𝒫 *+&,) ∪ 𝒫 -""% .

Age -of -onset information consistent with Orpha net annotations was incorporated by mapping 

coarse onset categories to specific age values via rule -based randomization to enhance narrative 

diversity. In our experiments, we synthesized 30 phenotype sets per disease using the above 

protocol and conducted a blations by varying the number of generated cases per disease. 

With the sampled and preprocessed phenotype set, we prompted GPT -4o to compose full case 

narratives. Specifically, we employed a two -round generation procedure. At the first round, we 

asked the LLM to generate only conditioned on the sampled phenotype sets , with a special focus 

on the primary clinical anchors 𝒫 1234 to simulate the scenario that physicians would normally 

note key presentations of a certain patient. We did not tell the LLM the true rare disease name to 

reduce the risk that it would introduce label -specific features and make the case summary overly 

pro totypical. Then, in the second round, we provided the LLM with the disease label for it to 

reflect and correct any unreasonable descriptions that have been generated to ensure the veracity 

of the rare disease case. We design a two -round generation process to explicitly balance diversity 

and clinical fidelity. During the first round, the LLM generates case narratives without access to 

the disease label, which promotes diversity by preventing the model from defaulting to 

prototypical or template -like disease presentations. Moreover, the first -round generation is 

conditioned on the primary clinical anchors 𝒫 1234 , ensuring that diversity arises around 

clinically salient evidence rather than arbitrary variation. In the second round, the disease label is 

provided to enable targeted correction of obvious inaccuracies, improving factual consistency 

while retaining mos t of the diversity introduced in the initial generation. Let 𝒟 ,)* = {(𝑞 3, 𝑦 3)}356

> 7

denote the resulting collection of simulated cases 𝑞 3 paired with their rare disease labels 𝑦 3.25 

Combining the real -world case reports curated from RareArena 𝒟 !"#$ , we have the initial rare 

disease case corpus 𝒟 8#," = 𝒟 ,)* ∪ 𝒟 !"#$ .

Model post -training and reasoning enhancement 

Starting from the case corpus 𝒟 8#," defined above, where each case narrative 𝑞 3 is paired with a 

rare disease label 𝑦 3 , we adopted a two -stage post -training pipeline to progressively enhance the 

diagnostic reasoning ability of the LLM. For each case, the target output consisted of a clinically 

grounded chain -of -thought reasoning trace 𝑜 3 together with the corresponding rare disease 

diagnosis. The overall goal was to train the model to map clinical case descriptions to reliable 

diagnostic reasoning processes and accurate rare disease predictions. 

For each (𝑞 3, 𝑦 3) ∈ 𝒟 8#," , we prompted the advanced reasoning model DeepSeek -R1 to generate 

a long -form chain -of -thought explanation and a final diagnosis. The generated responses were 

automatically verified following the RareArena evaluation setting, where a response was 

consider ed valid if the ground -truth diagnosis was successfully retrieved with a score of 2 under 

recall@5. Correct first -pass responses were retained directly. For cases in which the first -pass 

answer was incorrect, we provided the ground -truth disease label and prompted the model to 

perform reflection and generate a second complete reasoning attempt. Corrected second -pass 

reasoning traces were also included in the curated dataset. This process yielded a reasoning 

corpus 𝒟 9+: = {(𝑞 3, 𝑜 3)}356 

> ;′

of size N′=153,836. For the base student model, we selected 

DeepSeek -R1 -Distill -Qwen -32B because it provides a favorable balance among built -in 

reasoning capability, training efficiency, and practical deployment feasibility. We then fine -tuned 

the student model on 𝒟 9+: using supervised fine -tuning. This stage encouraged the model to 

imitate high -quality rare disease diagnostic reasoning traces, thereby equipping it with domain -

specific reasoning patterns while preserving the general language capabilities of the base mod el. 

The resulting model was denoted as ℳ<=: .

Although supervised fine -tuning improved diagnostic performance, its effectiveness remained 

constrained by the quality and coverage of the teacher -generated traces. To further enhance the 

model’s reasoning capability, we applied Direct Preference Optimizat ion (DPO) [17], which 

optimizes the model using pairwise preference data rather than relying solely on imitation. 

Starting from ℳ<=: , we generated multiple reasoning rollouts for selected cases and applied the 26 

same automated verification procedure to identify correct and incorrect diagnostic outputs. 

Reasoning traces leading to correct diagnoses were treated as preferred responses, whereas those 

leading to incorrect diagnoses were treated as dispreferred respons es. In practice, we randomly 

sampled five cases per disease and performed four rounds of rollout for each case summary to 

construct preference pairs. To balance diagnostic performance and training cost, we limited the 

number of preference pairs for each di sease to at most three, as pilot experiments on smaller 

LLMs showed no significant performance gains from including additional pairs. This process 

produced a preference dataset 𝒟 >?@ containing 14,250 triples (𝑞 3, 𝑜 3

> A

, 𝑜 3

> B

), where 𝑜 3 

> A

and 𝑜 3

> B

denote the preferred and dispreferred reasoning traces for the same case, respectively. During 

DPO training, ℳ<=: was used as the reference model. The optimization encouraged the current 

model to assign higher preference to clinically accurate reasoning traces than to weaker or 

incorrect alternatives. Through this preference -driven contrastive learning process, DPO f urther 

refined the model’s diagnostic reasoning behavior and improved its ability to generate accurate 

rare disease predictions beyond what could be achieved through supervised imitation alone. 

Retrospective cohort Study 

1.1 Participant enrollment and study design 

To evaluate whether RaDaR can generate early differential diagnoses that include the final rare 

disease diagnosis, we conducted a retrospective cohort study. We retrospectively extracted 

longitudinal electronic health record (EHR) data for patients with ra re diseases, including inpatient 

admissions, outpatient visits, and emergency department encounters from PUMCH and XHCMU. 

Patients were eligible for inclusion if they met the following criteria: 

1. Received a confirmed final diagnosis of a rare disease at one of the two participating centers. 

2. Lacked both a confirmed diagnosis and a clearly documented suspicion of the final condition at 

the time of their initial presentation. 

We excluded patients if: 27 

1. The final rare disease diagnosis had not yet been confirmed at the time of data extraction. 

2. The diagnosis had already been established at an external institution prior to the first visit. 

1.2 Determination of the Time of Clinical Suspicion 

To enable a fair comparison with standard clinical care, we established a physician baseline. 

Specifically, we defined the physician baseline as the earliest time point at which the final 

diagnosis was first recorded in the EHR as a clinical suspicion —or c ould reasonably be inferred 

from EHR documentation —rather than the time of diagnostic confirmation. The baseline was 

determined from two sources of evidence. The first is the explicit documentation, which means 

the specific disease name was explicitly men tioned in the clinical notes or listed in the differential 

diagnosis. The second is disease -specific testing. Even if the disease name is not explicitly 

documented, ordering a highly disease -specific test was taken as evidence of clinical suspicion. 

For ex ample, ordering a Bartonella henselae IgG/IgM antibody test for suspected cat -scratch 

disease. Non –disease -specific investigations, such as whole -genome sequencing or generic 

pathology for undifferentiated tumors, were not considered sufficient to indicate suspicion, as they 

do not target a s ingle disease or a narrow set of candidate diagnoses. The longitudinal EHRs were 

independently reviewed by two reviewers (S.H. and X.J.) to annotate the timing of clinical 

suspicion, with disagreements adjudicated by a senior rare -disease expert (S.M.). 

2. Deployment and Evaluation of RaDaR 

To simulate real -time clinical progression, we constructed cumulative EMR snapshots by 

sequentially aggregating data from the first visit through each subsequent encounter. This 

evaluation sequence continued up to the specific visit where clinical suspicio n was first established 

(the physician baseline). For this final snapshot, clinical notes were strictly truncated immediately 

prior to the timestamp of the documented suspicion, ensuring the model utilized only information 

available to the physician before the diagnosis was explicitly considered. At each encounter, 

RaDaR was queried to generate a differential diagnosis list up to 10 candidates with the prompt 

listed in Appendix L. 28 

Two reviewers (J.X. and S.H.) independently assessed whether RaDaR’s output effectively 

identified the final confirmed rare disease. The generated differential lists were scored using a 5 -

point ordinal scale adapted from prior studies (details in Supplemen tary Table 1). Scores were 

dichotomized into negative results (scores 0 –1; final diagnosis absent or not meaningfully 

identified) and positive results (scores 2 –4; final diagnosis present or strongly implied). For each 

patient, we identified the RaDaR susp icion timing, defined as the earliest visit number in the 

sequence at which RaDaR achieved a positive result. 

The top1, top3, top5, and full list recall were evaluated. Top -5 recall is reported in the main 

Results, while the remaining metrics are presented in the Extended Data. Model performance 

was summarized using two metrics. First, we calculated the visit -norm alized diagnostic 

advancement score (VNDAS), defined as: 

VNDAS = 1 − V model / (V all + 1) 

where Vmodel denotes the earliest visit at which the model generated the correct diagnosis, and 

Vall denotes the total number of visits for that patient. A higher VNDAS indicates that the model 

reached the correct diagnosis earlier in the clinical trajectory. Second, we calculated the 

proportion of cases in which RaDaR’s diagnostic suspicion occurred earlier than, at the same 

visit as, or later than the physician’s clinical suspicion. 

3. Clinical information analysis 

To analyze the flow of clinical information across diagnostic trajectories, we manually reviewed 

each patient’s longitudinal electronic medical records and annotated visit -level changes in 

clinical information. Clinical information was classified into four categories: symptoms and 

signs, laboratory tests, imaging and procedures including pathology, and treatments. For the first 

visit, all recorded information was labeled as newly added. For each subsequent visit, 

information was classified as newly added, u pdated, or unchanged. 

To explore which types of clinical information contributed to transitions from incorrect to correct 

diagnoses, we fitted logistic regression models restricted to transitions in which the model 

prediction was incorrect at the previous visit. The binary outc ome was whether the model 

prediction became correct at the current visit. Predictor variables included the numbers of newly 29 

added or updated symptoms, laboratory findings, imaging/procedural findings, and treatments at 

the current visit. Odds ratios and P values were reported. 

Randomized physician -assistance trial 

The study was approved by the Tsinghua University Ethics Committee (approval number: THU -

01 -2025 -1070 on November 18 , 2025) and was prospectively registered in the Chinese Clinical 

Trial Registry ( ChiCTR2500115619 ). All participants provided written informed consent prior to 

enrollment. The trial followed the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) 

guidelines. 

1. Physicians Enrollment 

Physicians were recruited through online links disseminated via social media platforms between 

January 1 and January 5, 2026. Interested participants completed an enrollment survey collecting 

demographic and professional information, including hospital aff iliation, clinical department, 

years of practice, and attitudes toward the use of LLMs in rare disease diagnosis. Eligible 

participants were practicing physicians from pediatrics, internal medicine, or neurology who 

were actively involved in clinical pract ice at the time of enrollment. After completion of the 

enrollment questionnaire and confirmation of eligibility, participants were randomized and 

formally enrolled in the trial. We calculated that 35 participants per group were needed to detect 

a 16% betwe en -group difference in diagnostic performance with 80% power and a two -sided 

significance level of 0.05, assuming a standard deviation of 24% based on a pilot study. To allow 

for an anticipated dropout rate of approximately 15%, we increased the target enr ollment to 42 

participants per group. 

2. Study design 

This study adopted a two -arm randomized physician -assistance design. Physicians were stratified 

by clinical department (pediatrics, internal medicine, or neurology) and by years of clinical 

experience (>5 years or 0–5 years), and were then randomly assigned to either a control arm or a 

RaDaR -assisted arm using permuted blocks of size two. To balance case difficulty between 

arms, the two physicians within the same block were assigned the same case set. The allocation 

sequence was generated using a prespecified Python script and implemented by an independent 

researcher (S.H.) who was not involved in participant recruitment, enrollment, or outcome 30 

assessment. Physicians in the control arm had access to general internet resources but were 

explicitly instructed not to use any LLMs. Physicians in the RaDaR -assisted arm had access to 

both general internet resources and RaDaR and were allowed to use RaDa R freely. 

3. Clinical cases 

To closely approximate real -world clinical scenarios, rare disease cases were selected from an in -

house dataset at Peking Union Medical College Hospital (PUMCH). All cases had confirmed 

rare disease diagnoses. Clinical narratives were truncated immediately before the diagnosis was 

explicitly stated or before definitive diagnostic tests, such as genetic or pathogen testing, were 

introduced. In total, 50 cases were included, comprising 20 cases from internal medicine, 20 

from pediatrics, and 10 from neurology . These cases were organized into four case sets for 

internal medicine, four for pediatrics, and two for neurology, with each set containing 5 cases. 

4. Study procedure 

Each physician was assigned one department -specific case set containing five cases. For each 

case, physicians first provided a diagnosis based solely on their own knowledge and experience, 

serving as the baseline assessment. They then reassessed the same c ases under their assigned 

condition, using either internet resources alone or internet resources plus RaDaR. All diagnostic 

responses were submitted through a web -based platform, which automatically recorded the time 

spent on each case. After completing ea ch case, physicians rated the perceived helpfulness of the 

assigned assistance strategy and their diagnostic confidence on a 5 -point Likert scale. Physicians 

who did not complete the diagnostic tasks were excluded from the final analysis. 

5. Study outcome 

The primary outcome was physician -level diagnostic accuracy, defined as the proportion of the 

five assigned cases for which the physician provided the correct final diagnosis. Two reviewers 

(J.Z. and X.J.) were blinded to intervention assignment and participant identifiers and 

independently evaluated all diagnostic responses, and any discrepancies were resolved by a 

senior physician (M.S.). Scores of “2 (closely related),” “3 (exact match),” and “4 (more specific 

and accurate)” were considered cor rect. The detailed scoring criteria are provided in the 

Supplementary Table 1. 31 

Secondary outcomes included diagnostic time per case and subjective helpfulness of the assigned 

assistance strategy. In an exploratory safety -related analysis , we also assessed confidence 

calibration error, defined as the mean absolute difference across the five cases between 

diagnostic correctness, coded as 0 or 1, and self -reported confidence, after rescaling confidence 

scores to a 0 –1 range. 

Statistical Analysis 

We used unpaired two -sided t -tests to compare diagnostic advancement scores and two -sided 

Fisher’s exact tests to compare diagnostic advancement ratios across disease subgroups. For the 

randomized physician -assistance trial, primary and secondary outcomes were compared between 

the RaDaR -assisted and control arms using two -sided unpaired Student’s t -tests. To assess 

whether the effect of RaDaR differed across physician subgroups, we performed interaction 

analyses using binomial generalized linear models with a logit link. In these models, the number 

of correctly diagnosed cases out of the five assigned cases was modeled as the outcome, 

intervention arm was included as the main predictor, and an interaction term between 

intervention arm and either clinical exp erience or department was added. Odds ratios and two -

sided P values were reported for the interaction models. Pediatrics and physicians with 0 –5 years 

of clinical experience were used as reference categories. A two -sided P < 0.05 was considered 

statistical ly significant. 32 

REFERENCES 

1 Nguengang Wakap, S. et al. Es=ma=ng cumula=ve point prevalence of rare diseases: 

analysis of the Orphanet database. European Journal of Human Gene2cs 28 , 165 -173 

(2020). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41431 -019 -0508 -0

2 The Lancet Diabetes, E. Rare diseases: individually rare, collec=vely common. Lancet 

Diabetes Endocrinol 11 , 139 (2023). hPps://doi.org/10.1016/s2213 -8587(23)00042 -6

3 Haendel, M. et al. How many rare diseases are there? Nat Rev Drug Discov 19 , 77 -78 

(2020). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/d41573 -019 -00180 -y

4 Benito -Lozano, J., López -Villalba, B., Arias -Merino, G., Posada de la Paz, M. & Alonso -

Ferreira, V. Diagnos=c delay in rare diseases: data from the Spanish rare diseases pa=ent 

registry. Orphanet J Rare Dis 17 , 418 (2022). hPps://doi.org/10.1186/s13023 -022 -02530 -

3

5 Taruscio, D. & Gahl, W. A. Rare diseases: challenges and opportuni=es for research and 

public health. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 10 , 13 (2024). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41572 -024 -00505 -1

6 Glaubitz, R. et al. The cost of the diagnos=c odyssey of pa=ents with suspected rare 

diseases. Orphanet J Rare Dis 20 , 222 (2025). hPps://doi.org/10.1186/s13023 -025 -

03751 -y

7 Grier, J., Hirano, M., Karaa, A., Shepard, E. & Thompson, J. L. P. Diagnos=c odyssey of 

pa=ents with mitochondrial disease: Results of a survey. Neurol Genet 4, e230 (2018). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1212/nxg.0000000000000230 

8 Thompson, J. L. P. et al. The evolu=on of the mitochondrial disease diagnos=c odyssey. 

Orphanet J Rare Dis 18 , 157 (2023). hPps://doi.org/10.1186/s13023 -023 -02754 -x

9 Daich Varela, M., SchloPmann, P., Luna Pinto, J. & Michaelides, M. Diagnos=c Odyssey of 

More than 1000 Pa=ents with Inherited Re=nal Diseases. Ophthalmology 131 , 251 -253 

(2024). hPps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2023.10.017 

10 Zurynski, Y. et al. Australian children living with rare diseases: experiences of diagnosis 

and perceived consequences of diagnos=c delays. Orphanet J Rare Dis 12 , 68 (2017). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1186/s13023 -017 -0622 -4

11 Isono, M., Kokado, M. & Kato, K. Why does it take so long for rare disease pa=ents to get 

an accurate diagnosis? -A qualita=ve inves=ga=on of pa=ent experiences of hereditary 

angioedema. PLoS One 17 , e0265847 (2022). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0265847 

12 Miteva, T., Jordanova, R., Iskrov, G. & Stefanov, R. General knowledge and awareness on 

rare diseases among general prac==oners in Bulgaria. Georgian Med News , 16 -19 

(2011). 

13 Mao, X. et al. A phenotype -based AI pipeline outperforms human experts in 

differen=ally diagnosing rare diseases using EHRs. npj Digital Medicine 8, 68 (2025). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41746 -025 -01452 -1

14 Smedley, D. et al. Next -genera=on diagnos=cs and disease -gene discovery with the 

Exomiser. Nat Protoc 10 , 2004 -2015 (2015). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.124 33 

15 Tu, T. et al. Towards conversa=onal diagnos=c ar=ficial intelligence. Nature 642 , 442 -450 

(2025). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -025 -08866 -7

16 Zhou, S. et al. Large language models for disease diagnosis: a scoping review. npj 

Ar2ficial Intelligence 1, 9 (2025). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s44387 -025 -00011 -z

17 Liu, X. et al. A generalist medical language model for disease diagnosis assistance. 

Nature Medicine 31 , 932 -942 (2025). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41591 -024 -03416 -6

18 Shyr, C. et al. Large Language Models for Rare Disease Diagnosis at the Undiagnosed 

Diseases Network. JAMA Network Open 8, e2528538 -e2528538 (2025). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2025.28538 

19 Chimirri, L. et al. Consistent performance of large language models in rare disease 

diagnosis across ten languages and 4917 cases. eBioMedicine 121 (2025). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ebiom.2025.105957 

20 Zhao, W. et al. An agen=c system for rare disease diagnosis with traceable reasoning. 

Nature (2026). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -025 -10097 -9

21 Zhao, W. et al. An Agen=c System for Rare Disease Diagnosis with Traceable Reasoning. 

arXiv:2506.20430 (2025). < hPps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250620430Z >. 

22 Guo, D. et al. DeepSeek -R1 incen=vizes reasoning in LLMs through reinforcement 

learning. Nature 645 , 633 -638 (2025). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -025 -09422 -z

23 Riedemann, L., Labonne, M. & Gilbert, S. The path forward for large language models in 

medicine is open. npj Digital Medicine 7, 339 (2024). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41746 -

024 -01344 -w

24 Nagarajan, R. et al. Economics and Equity of Large Language Models: Health Care 

Perspec=ve. J Med Internet Res 26 , e64226 (2024). hPps://doi.org/10.2196/64226 

25 Haichao Chen, Z. Z., Songchi Zhou, Shikai Hu, Jinyuan Wang, Ye Jin, Xianghong Jin, Xiaofei 

Wang, Weizhi Ma, Yih Chung Tham, Honghan Wu, Bin Sheng, Shuyang Zhang, Sheng Yu, 

Tien Yin Wong. RareArena: A Comprehensive Benchmark Dataset Unveiling the Poten=al 

of Large Language Models in Rare Disease Diagnosis. Lancet Digital Health In Press 

(2025). 

26 Chen, X. et al. RareBench: Can LLMs Serve as Rare Diseases Specialists? , 

arXiv:2402.06341 (2024). < hPps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024arXiv240206341C >. 

27 Reese, J. T. et al. Systema=c benchmarking demonstrates large language models have 

not reached the diagnos=c accuracy of tradi=onal rare -disease decision support tools. 

European Journal of Human Gene2cs 34 , 498 -504 (2026). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41431 -026 -02054 -5

28 OpenAI et al. gpt -oss -120b & gpt -oss -20b Model Card. arXiv:2508.10925 (2025). 

<hPps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250810925O >. 

29 Chen, J. et al. HuatuoGPT -o1, Towards Medical Complex Reasoning with LLMs. 

arXiv:2412.18925 (2024). < hPps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2024arXiv241218925C >. 

30 Huang, X., Wu, J., Liu, H., Tang, X. & Zhou, Y. m1: Unleash the Poten=al of Test -Time 

Scaling for Medical Reasoning with Large Language Models. arXiv:2504.00869 (2025). 

<hPps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250400869H >. 

31 Team, M. et al. Baichuan -M2: Scaling Medical Capability with Large Verifier System. 

arXiv:2509.02208 (2025). < hPps://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv250902208M >. 34 

32 Fujiwara, T., Shin, J. M. & Yamaguchi, A. Advances in the development of PubCaseFinder, 

including the new applica=on programming interface and matching algorithm. Hum 

Mutat 43 , 734 -742 (2022). hPps://doi.org/10.1002/humu.24341 

33 Robinson, P. N. et al. Interpretable Clinical Genomics with a Likelihood Ra=o Paradigm. 

Am J Hum Genet 107 , 403 -417 (2020). hPps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajhg.2020.06.021 

34 Kobayashi Takahashi, Y., Hayakawa, I. & Abe, Y. Diagnos=c odyssey of Guillain -Barré 

syndrome in children. Brain Dev 46 , 108 -113 (2024). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1016/j.braindev.2023.10.004 

35 Garcia, B. T. et al. Improving automated deep phenotyping through large language 

models using retrieval -augmented genera=on. Genome Med 17 , 91 (2025). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1186/s13073 -025 -01521 -w

36 Yang, J. et al. Enhancing phenotype recogni=on in clinical notes using large language 

models: PhenoBCBERT and PhenoGPT. PaKerns 5, 100887 (2024). 

hPps://doi.org/hPps://doi.org/10.1016/j.paPer.2023.100887 

37 Savage, C. H. et al. Open -Source Large Language Models in Radiology: A Review and 

Tutorial for Prac=cal Research and Clinical Deployment. Radiology 314 , e241073 (2025). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.241073 

38 Wiest, I. C. et al. Privacy -preserving large language models for structured medical 

informa=on retrieval. NPJ Digit Med 7, 257 (2024). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41746 -024 -

01233 -2

39 McIntosh, F., Murina, S., Chen, L., Vargas, H. A. & Becker, A. S. Keeping private pa=ent 

data off the cloud: A comparison of local LLMs for anonymizing radiology reports. 

European Journal of Radiology Ar2ficial Intelligence 2, 100020 (2025). 

hPps://doi.org/hPps://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrai.2025.100020 

40 Shea, Y. F., Lee, C. M. Y., Ip, W. C. T., Luk, D. W. A. & Wong, S. S. W. Use of GPT -4 to 

Analyze Medical Records of Pa=ents With Extensive Inves=ga=ons and Delayed 

Diagnosis. JAMA Netw Open 6, e2325000 (2023). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2023.25000 

41 Mitani, A. A. & Haneuse, S. Small Data Challenges of Studying Rare Diseases. JAMA Netw 

Open 3, e201965 (2020). hPps://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2020.1965 

42 May, M. Rare -disease researchers pioneer a unique approach to clinical trials. Nature 

Medicine 29 , 1884 -1886 (2023). hPps://doi.org/10.1038/s41591 -023 -02333 -4

43 Reese, J. T. et al. Evalua=on of the Diagnos=c Accuracy of GPT -4 in Five Thousand Rare 

Disease Cases. medRxiv , 2024.2007.2022.24310816 (2024). 

hPps://doi.org/10.1101/2024.07.22.24310816 35 

Figure Legend 

Figure 1. Development and multi -stage validation framework of the RaDaR model. 

The top left panel illustrates the model development pipeline, consisting of three stages: phenotype construction, 

synthetic case augmentation, and reasoning enhancement. The top right panel summarizes the three major steps of 

model validation. The first i s the cross -sectional evaluation , including both public benchmark evaluation and 

external validation (334 cases). The second is a retrospective cohort study, which assesses model’s performance 

along retrospective rare -disease diagnostic trajectories . The third is a randomized physician -assistance trial, which 

evaluates whether RaDaR assistance improves physicians’ rare -disease diagnostic accuracy . The bottom table 

presents benchmark details, including the number of cases and diseases, input types, and data accessibility status. 

Figure 2. Diagnostic performance of RaDaR and baseline models on rare disease 

benchmarks and external validation. 

(a) Internal validation on the RareArena hold -out test set for two tasks: Rare Disease Screening (left) and Rare 

Disease Confirmation (right). (b) External validation performance on real -world patient datasets collected from four 

independent clinical cente rs. Bars indicate diagnostic accuracy, defined as top -5 recall; error bars indicate standard 

errors of the mean across 10 repeated evaluations. (c) Model performance on the two phenotype -input rare disease 

benchmarks (left, Reese et al.; right, RareBench) 

Figure 3. Evaluation of RaDaR performance along rare -disease diagnostic trajectories. 

(a) Schematic illustration of the study design comparing the timing of diagnosis. The timelines depict the clinical 

journey from symptom onset to documented clinical suspicion. Two distinct phases are identified: the pre -center 

interval (symptom onset to i nitial presentation at a participating center) and the within -center interval (initial 

presentation to clinical suspicion). The timing of the model’s correct identification (RaDaR suspicion, red cross) is 

compared with the initial clinical suspicion docume nted by physicians (blue cross). (b) Visit -normalized diagnostic 

advancement scores. Bars indicate mean scores and error bars indicate standard errors of the mean. (c) Distribution 

of diagnostic timing relative to physician suspicion for each model, categorized as earlier, same visit, or later 

identification. (d) Potential diagnostic lead time if the final diagnosis had been prioritized at the earliest vis it when 

RaDaR identified it. Horizontal stacked bars show the distribution of lead time measured in months and number of 

visits. Grey indicates no diagnostic advancement; progressively darker red segments indicate larger gains .

Figure 4. Evaluation of RaDaR potential in facilitating rare disease diagnosis in a 

randomized physician -assistance trial. 

(a) Study design of the randomized physician -assistance trial. (b) Diagnostic accuracy in the control and RaDaR -

assisted groups, defined as the proportion of the five assigned cases for which physicians included the final 

diagnosis in their differential diagnosis list. (c) Time r equired to complete the diagnostic task. (d) Self -reported 

helpfulness score. (e) Diagnostic accuracy stratified by physicians’ working experience. (f) Diagnostic accuracy 

stratified by specialty. Bars indicate mean values and error bars indicate standard errors of the mean. Each dot 

represents one physician. Diagnostic accuracy was calculated as the proportion of correctly diagnosed cases among 

five assigned cases. Helpfulness was assessed using a 1 –5 rating scale. Statistical comparisons for overall physician -

leve l outcomes were performed using two -sided unpaired Student’s t -tests. Interaction analyses using binomial 

generalized linear models were performed to determine whether the benefit of RaDaR varied across physician 

subgroups. n.s ., not significant; ****P < 0.0001. 

Figure 5. Synthetic -data ablation and scaling analyses. 36 

(a) Performance comparison between the baseline model and the synthetic -data -augmented model across four 

frequency bins. (b) The absolute performance gain (in percentage points) attributed to synthetic augmentation. (c) 

Overall performance comparison of th e base model, the model fine -tuned on real -world data only, and the model 

fine -tuned on synthetic data only. ( d) Performance of the model fine -tuned on synthetic data only, evaluated on 

synthesizable and non -synthesizable diseases. ( e) Synthetic -data scaling trend. The log -log scale plot illustrates the 

monotonic trend between diagnostic performance and the number of synthetic samples generated per disease 

(ranging from 1 to 30).